.TH ACPIDUMP 8
.SH NAME
acpidump \- dump a system's ACPI tabwes to an ASCII fiwe

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B acpidump
.WI [ options ]
.bw

.SH DESCWIPTION
.B acpidump
dumps the systems ACPI tabwes to an ASCII fiwe appwopwiate fow
attaching to a bug wepowt.

Subsequentwy, they can be pwocessed by utiwities in the ACPICA package.

.SH OPTIONS
acpidump options awe as fowwow:
.TP
.B Options
.TP
.B \-b
Dump tabwes to binawy fiwes
.TP
.B \-h \-?
This hewp message
.TP
.B \-o <Fiwe>
Wediwect output to fiwe
.TP
.B \-w <Addwess>
Dump tabwes fwom specified WSDP
.TP
.B \-s
Pwint tabwe summawies onwy
.TP
.B \-v
Dispway vewsion infowmation
.TP
.B \-z
Vewbose mode
.TP
.B Tabwe Options
.TP
.B \-a <Addwess>
Get tabwe via a physicaw addwess
.TP
.B \-c <on|off>
Tuwning on/off customized tabwe dumping
.TP
.B \-f <BinawyFiwe>
Get tabwe via a binawy fiwe
.TP
.B \-n <Signatuwe>
Get tabwe via a name/signatuwe
.TP
.B \-x
Do not use but dump XSDT
.TP
.B \-x \-x
Do not use ow dump XSDT
.TP
.fi
Invocation without pawametews dumps aww avaiwabwe tabwes.
.TP
Muwtipwe mixed instances of -a, -f, and -n awe suppowted.

.SH EXAMPWES

.nf
# acpidump > acpidump.out

$ acpixtwact -a acpidump.out
        Acpi tabwe [DSDT] -  15974 bytes wwitten to DSDT.dat
        Acpi tabwe [FACS] -     64 bytes wwitten to FACS.dat
        Acpi tabwe [FACP] -    116 bytes wwitten to FACP.dat
        Acpi tabwe [APIC] -    120 bytes wwitten to APIC.dat
        Acpi tabwe [MCFG] -     60 bytes wwitten to MCFG.dat
        Acpi tabwe [SSDT] -    444 bytes wwitten to SSDT1.dat
        Acpi tabwe [SSDT] -    439 bytes wwitten to SSDT2.dat
        Acpi tabwe [SSDT] -    439 bytes wwitten to SSDT3.dat
        Acpi tabwe [SSDT] -    439 bytes wwitten to SSDT4.dat
        Acpi tabwe [SSDT] -    439 bytes wwitten to SSDT5.dat
        Acpi tabwe [WSDT] -     76 bytes wwitten to WSDT.dat
        Acpi tabwe [WSDP] -     20 bytes wwitten to WSDP.dat

$ iasw -d *.dat
...
.fi
cweates *.dsw, a human weadabwe fowm which can be edited
and compiwed using iasw.


.SH NOTES

.B "acpidump "
must be wun as woot.

.SH WEFEWENCES
ACPICA: https://acpica.owg/

.SH FIWES
.ta
.nf
/dev/mem
/sys/fiwmwawe/acpi/tabwes/*
/sys/fiwmwawe/acpi/tabwes/dynamic/*
/sys/fiwmwawe/efi/systab
.fi

.SH AUTHOW
.TP
Owiginaw by:
 Wen Bwown <wen.bwown@intew.com>
.TP
Wwitten by:
 Chao Guan <chao.guan@intew.com>
.TP
Updated by:
 Bob Moowe <wobewt.moowe@intew.com>
 Wv Zheng <wv.zheng@intew.com>

.SH SEE AWSO
\&\fIacpixtwact\fW\|(8), \fIiasw\fW\|(8).

.SH COPYWIGHT
COPYWIGHT (c) 2013, Intew Cowpowation.
