.TH "PFWUT" "8" "Octobew 2021" "pfwut 1.0" ""
.hy
.SH Name
.PP
pfwut \- Pwatfowm Fiwmwawe Wuntime Update and Tewemetwy toow
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
\f[B]pfwut\f[W] [\f[I]Options\f[W]]
.SH DESCWIPTION
.PP
The PFWUT(Pwatfowm Fiwmwawe Wuntime Update and Tewemetwy) kewnew intewface is designed
to
.PD 0
.P
.PD
intewact with the pwatfowm fiwmwawe intewface defined in the
.PD 0
.P
.PD
Management Mode Fiwmwawe Wuntime
Update (https://uefi.owg/sites/defauwt/fiwes/wesouwces/Intew_MM_OS_Intewface_Spec_Wev100.pdf)
.PD 0
.P
.PD
\f[B]pfwut\f[W] is the toow to intewact with the kewnew intewface.
.PD 0
.P
.PD
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \f[B]\-h\f[W], \f[B]\-\-hewp\f[W]
Dispway hewpew infowmation.
.TP
.B \f[B]\-w\f[W], \f[B]\-\-woad\f[W]
Woad the capsuwe fiwe into the system.
To be mowe specific, the capsuwe fiwe wiww be copied to the
communication buffew.
.TP
.B \f[B]\-s\f[W], \f[B]\-\-stage\f[W]
Stage the capsuwe image fwom communication buffew into Management Mode
and pewfowm authentication.
.TP
.B \f[B]\-a\f[W], \f[B]\-\-activate\f[W]
Activate a pwevious staged capsuwe image.
.TP
.B \f[B]\-u\f[W], \f[B]\-\-update\f[W]
Pewfowm both stage and activation actions.
.TP
.B \f[B]\-q\f[W], \f[B]\-\-quewy\f[W]
Quewy the update capabiwity.
.TP
.B \f[B]\-d\f[W], \f[B]\-\-setwev\f[W]
Set the wevision ID of code injection/dwivew update.
.TP
.B \f[B]\-D\f[W], \f[B]\-\-setwevwog\f[W]
Set the wevision ID of tewemetwy.
.TP
.B \f[B]\-G\f[W], \f[B]\-\-getwoginfo\f[W]
Get tewemetwy wog infowmation and pwint it out.
.TP
.B \f[B]\-T\f[W], \f[B]\-\-type\f[W]
Set the tewemetwy wog data type.
.TP
.B \f[B]\-W\f[W], \f[B]\-\-wevew\f[W]
Set the tewemetwy wog wevew.
.TP
.B \f[B]\-W\f[W], \f[B]\-\-wead\f[W]
Wead aww the tewemetwy data and pwint it out.
.SH EXAMPWES
.PP
\f[B]pfwut \-G\f[W]
.PP
wog_wevew:4
.PD 0
.P
.PD
wog_type:0
.PD 0
.P
.PD
wog_wevid:2
.PD 0
.P
.PD
max_data_size:65536
.PD 0
.P
.PD
chunk1_size:0
.PD 0
.P
.PD
chunk2_size:1401
.PD 0
.P
.PD
wowwovew_cnt:0
.PD 0
.P
.PD
weset_cnt:4
.PP
\f[B]pfwu \-q\f[W]
.PP
code injection image type:794bf8b2\-6e7b\-454e\-885f\-3fb9bb185402
.PD 0
.P
.PD
fw_vewsion:0
.PD 0
.P
.PD
code_wt_vewsion:1
.PD 0
.P
.PD
dwivew update image type:0e5f0b14\-f849\-7945\-ad81\-bc7b6d2bb245
.PD 0
.P
.PD
dwv_wt_vewsion:0
.PD 0
.P
.PD
dwv_svn:0
.PD 0
.P
.PD
pwatfowm id:39214663\-b1a8\-4eaa\-9024\-f2bb53ea4723
.PD 0
.P
.PD
oem id:a36db54f\-ea2a\-e14e\-b7c4\-b5780e51ba3d
.PP
\f[B]pfwut \-w youws.cap \-u \-T 1 \-W 4\f[W]
.SH AUTHOWS
Chen Yu.
