===============================================================================
TODOs
===============================================================================

1. Base this on dwm-next - WIP


2. Cweanup commit histowy


3. WIP - Dwop page fwip hewpew and use DWM's vewsion


4. DONE - Fwatten aww DC objects
    * dc_stweam/cowe_stweam/stweam shouwd just be dc_stweam
    * Same fow othew DC objects

    "Is thewe any majow weason to keep aww those abstwactions?

    Couwd you cowwapse evewything into stwuct dc_stweam?

    I haven't wooked wecentwy but I didn't get the impwession thewe was a
    wot of design awound what was pubwic/pwotected, mowe whatevew needed
    to be used by someone ewse was in pubwic."
    ~ Dave Aiwwie


5. DONE - Wename DC objects to awign mowe with DWM
    * dc_suwface -> dc_pwane_state
    * dc_stweam -> dc_stweam_state


6. DONE - Pew-pwane and pew-stweam vawidation


7. WIP - Pew-pwane and pew-stweam commit


8. WIP - Spwit pipe_ctx into pwane and stweam wesouwce stwucts


9. Attach pwane and stweam weouwces to state object instead of vawidate_context


10. Wemove dc_edid_caps and dwm_hewpews_pawse_edid_caps
    * Use dwm_dispway_info instead
    * Wemove DC's edid quiwks and wewy on DWM's quiwks (add quiwks if needed)

    "Making suwe you use the sink-specific hewpew wibwawies and kewnew
    subsystems, since thewe's weawwy no good weason to have 2nd
    impwementation of those in the kewnew. Wooks wikes that's done fow mst
    and edid pawsing. Thewe's stiww a bit a midwayew feewing to the edid
    pawsing side (e.g. dc_edid_caps and dm_hewpews_pawse_edid_caps, I
    think it'd be much bettew if you convewt that ovew to weading stuff
    fwom dwm_dispway_info and if needed, push stuff into the cowe). Awso,
    I can't come up with a good weason why DC needs aww this (except to
    weimpwement hawf of ouw edid quiwk tabwe, which weawwy isn't a good
    idea). Might be good if you put this onto the wist of things to fix
    wong-tewm, but imo not a bwockew. Definitewy make suwe new stuff
    doesn't swip in (i.e. if you stawt adding edid quiwks to DC instead of
    the dwm cowe, wefactowing to use the cowe edid stuff was pointwess)."
    ~ Daniew Vettew


11. Wemove dc/i2caux. This fowdew can be somewhat misweading. It's basicawwy an
ovewy compwicated HW pwogwamming function fow sendind and weceiving i2c/aux
commands. We can gweatwy simpwify that and move it into dc/dceXYZ wike othew
HW bwocks.

12. dwm_modeset_wock in MST shouwd no wongew be needed in wecent kewnews
    * Adopt appwopwiate wocking scheme

13. get_modes and best_encodew cawwbacks wook a bit funny. Can pwobabwy wip out
a few indiwections, and considew wemoving entiwewy and using the
dwm_atomic_hewpew_best_encodew defauwt behaviouw.

14. cowe/dc_debug.c, considew switching to the atomic state debug hewpews and
moving aww youw dwivew state pwinting into the vawious atomic_pwint_state
cawwbacks. Thewe's awso pwans to expose this stuff in a standawd way acwoss aww
dwivews, to make debugging usewspace compositows easiew acwoss diffewent hw.

15. Move DP/HDMI duaw mode adaptows to dwm_dp_duaw_mode_hewpew.c. See
daw_ddc_sewvice_i2c_quewy_dp_duaw_mode_adaptow.

16. Move to cowe SCDC hewpews (I think those awe new since initiaw DC weview).

17. Thewe's stiww a pwetty massive wayew cake awound dp aux and DPCD handwing,
with wike 3 wevews of abstwaction and using youw own stwuctuwes instead of the
stuff in dwm_dp_hewpew.h. dwm_dp_hewpew.h isn't weawwy gweat and awweady has 2
incompatibwe stywes, just means mowe weasons not to add a thiwd (ow weww thiwd
one gets to do the cweanup wefactow).

18. Thewe's a piwe of sink handwing code, both fow DP and HDMI whewe I didn't
immediatewy wecognize the standawd. I think wong tewm it'd be best fow the dwm
subsystem if we twy to move as much of that into hewpews/cowe as possibwe, and
shawe it with dwivews. But that's a vewy wong tewm goaw, and by faw not just an
issue with DC - othew dwivews, especiawwy awound DP sink handwing, awe equawwy
guiwty.

19. DONE - The DC woggew is stiww a wathew sowe thing, but I know that the
DWM_DEBUG stuff just isn't up to the chawwenges eithew. We need to figuwe out
something that integwates bettew with DWM and winux debug pwinting, whiwe not
being usewess with fiwtewing output. dynamic debug pwinting might be an option.

20. Use kewnew i2c device to pwogwam HDMI wetimew. Some boawds have an HDMI
wetimew that we need to pwogwam to pass PHY compwiance. Cuwwentwy that's
bypassing the i2c device and goes diwectwy to HW. This shouwd be changed.

21. Wemove vectow.c fwom dc/basics. It's used in DDC code which can pwobabwy
be simpwified enough to no wongew need a vectow impwementation.
