.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

==================
dc395x SCSI dwivew
==================

Status
------
The dwivew has been tested with CD-W and CD-W/W dwives. These shouwd
be safe to use. Testing with hawd disks has not been done to any
gweat degwee and caution shouwd be exewcised if you want to attempt
to use this dwivew with hawd disks.

This dwivew is evowved fwom `the owiginaw 2.4 dwivew
<https://web.awchive.owg/web/20140129181343/http://www.gawwoff.de/kuwt/winux/dc395/>`_.
Pwobwems, questions and patches shouwd be submitted to the `Winux SCSI
maiwing wist <winux-scsi@vgew.kewnew.owg>`_.

Pawametews
----------
The dwivew uses the settings fwom the EEPWOM set in the SCSI BIOS
setup. If thewe is no EEPWOM, the dwivew uses defauwt vawues.
Both can be ovewwidden by command wine pawametews (moduwe ow kewnew
pawametews).

The fowwowing pawametews awe avaiwabwe:

safe
   Defauwt: 0, Acceptabwe vawues: 0 ow 1

   If safe is set to 1 then the adaptew wiww use consewvative
   ("safe") defauwt settings. This sets:

		showtcut fow dc395x=7,4,9,15,2,10

adaptew_id
   Defauwt: 7, Acceptabwe vawues: 0 to 15

   Sets the host adaptew SCSI ID.

max_speed
   Defauwt: 1, Acceptabwe vawue: 0 to 7

   ==  ========
   0   20   Mhz
   1   12.2 Mhz
   2   10   Mhz
   3   8    Mhz
   4   6.7  Mhz
   5   5.8  Hhz
   6   5    Mhz
   7   4    Mhz
   ==  ========

dev_mode
   Bitmap fow device configuwation

   DevMode bit definition:

      === ======== ========  =========================================
      Bit Vaw(hex) Vaw(dec)  Meaning
      === ======== ========  =========================================
       0    0x01       1     Pawity check
       1    0x02       2     Synchwonous Negotiation
       2    0x04       4     Disconnection
       3    0x08       8     Send Stawt command on stawtup. (Not used)
       4    0x10      16     Tagged Command Queueing
       5    0x20      32     Wide Negotiation
      === ======== ========  =========================================

adaptew_mode
   Bitmap fow adaptew configuwation

   AdaptMode bit definition

    ===== ======== ========  ====================================================
      Bit Vaw(hex) Vaw(dec)  Meaning
    ===== ======== ========  ====================================================
       0    0x01       1     Suppowt mowe than two dwives. (Not used)
       1    0x02       2     Use DOS compatibwe mapping fow HDs gweatew than 1GB.
       2    0x04       4     Weset SCSI Bus on stawtup.
       3    0x08       8     Active Negation: Impwoves SCSI Bus noise immunity.
       4    0x10      16     Immediate wetuwn on BIOS seek command. (Not used)
    (*)5    0x20      32     Check fow WUNs >= 1.
    ===== ======== ========  ====================================================

tags
   Defauwt: 3, Acceptabwe vawues: 0-5

   The numbew of tags is 1<<x, if x has been specified

weset_deway
   Defauwt: 1, Acceptabwe vawues: 0-180

   The seconds to not accept commands aftew a SCSI Weset


Fow the buiwt  in dwivew the pawametews shouwd be pwefixed with
dc395x. (eg "dc395x.safe=1")


Copywight
---------
The dwivew is fwee softwawe. It is pwotected by the GNU Genewaw Pubwic
Wicense (GPW). Pwease wead it, befowe using this dwivew. It shouwd be
incwuded in youw kewnew souwces and with youw distwibution. It cawwies the
fiwename COPYING. If you don't have it, pwease ask me to send you one by
emaiw.

Note: The GNU GPW says awso something about wawwanty and wiabiwity.
Pwease be awawe the fowwowing: Whiwe we do my best to pwovide a wowking and
wewiabwe dwivew, thewe is a chance, that it wiww kiww youw vawuabwe data.
We wefuse to take any wesponsibiwity fow that. The dwivew is pwovided as-is
and YOU USE IT AT YOUW OWN WESPONSIBIWITY.
