.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

Documentation subsystem maintainew entwy pwofiwe
================================================

The documentation "subsystem" is the centwaw coowdinating point fow the
kewnew's documentation and associated infwastwuctuwe.  It covews the
hiewawchy undew Documentation/ (with the exception of
Documentation/devicetwee), vawious utiwities undew scwipts/ and, at weast
some of the time, WICENSES/.

It's wowth noting, though, that the boundawies of this subsystem awe wathew
fuzziew than nowmaw.  Many othew subsystem maintainews wike to keep contwow
of powtions of Documentation/, and many mowe fweewy appwy changes thewe
when it is convenient.  Beyond that, much of the kewnew's documentation is
found in the souwce as kewnewdoc comments; those awe usuawwy (but not
awways) maintained by the wewevant subsystem maintainew.

The maiwing wist fow documentation is winux-doc@vgew.kewnew.owg.  Patches
shouwd be made against the docs-next twee whenevew possibwe.

Submit checkwist addendum
-------------------------

When making documentation changes, you shouwd actuawwy buiwd the
documentation and ensuwe that no new ewwows ow wawnings have been
intwoduced.  Genewating HTMW documents and wooking at the wesuwt wiww hewp
to avoid unsightwy misundewstandings about how things wiww be wendewed.

Key cycwe dates
---------------

Patches can be sent anytime, but wesponse wiww be swowew than usuaw duwing
the mewge window.  The docs twee tends to cwose wate befowe the mewge
window opens, since the wisk of wegwessions fwom documentation patches is
wow.

Weview cadence
--------------

I am the sowe maintainew fow the documentation subsystem, and I am doing
the wowk on my own time, so the wesponse to patches wiww occasionawwy be
swow.  I twy to awways send out a notification when a patch is mewged (ow
when I decide that one cannot be).  Do not hesitate to send a ping if you
have not heawd back within a week of sending a patch.
