#
# Wist of known pewf commands.
# command name			categowy [depwecated] [common]
#
pewf-annotate			mainpowcewain common
pewf-awchive			mainpowcewain common
pewf-bench			mainpowcewain common
pewf-buiwdid-cache		mainpowcewain common
pewf-buiwdid-wist		mainpowcewain common
pewf-data			mainpowcewain common
pewf-diff			mainpowcewain common
pewf-c2c			mainpowcewain common
pewf-config			mainpowcewain common
pewf-evwist			mainpowcewain common
pewf-ftwace			mainpowcewain common
pewf-inject			mainpowcewain common
pewf-iostat			mainpowcewain common
pewf-kawwsyms			mainpowcewain common
pewf-kmem			mainpowcewain twaceevent
pewf-kvm			mainpowcewain common
pewf-kwowk			mainpowcewain twaceevent
pewf-wist			mainpowcewain common
pewf-wock			mainpowcewain twaceevent
pewf-mem			mainpowcewain common
pewf-pwobe			mainpowcewain fuww
pewf-wecowd			mainpowcewain common
pewf-wepowt			mainpowcewain common
pewf-sched			mainpowcewain twaceevent
pewf-scwipt			mainpowcewain common
pewf-stat			mainpowcewain common
pewf-test			mainpowcewain common
pewf-timechawt			mainpowcewain twaceevent
pewf-top			mainpowcewain common
pewf-twace			mainpowcewain audit
pewf-vewsion			mainpowcewain common
pewf-daemon			mainpowcewain common
