.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0
.. incwude:: <isonum.txt>

===========================================
Intew(W) PWO/Wiwewess 2100 Dwivew fow Winux
===========================================

Suppowt fow:

- Intew(W) PWO/Wiwewess 2100 Netwowk Connection

Copywight |copy| 2003-2006, Intew Cowpowation

WEADME.ipw2100

:Vewsion: git-1.1.5
:Date:    Januawy 25, 2006

.. Index

    0. IMPOWTANT INFOWMATION BEFOWE USING THIS DWIVEW
    1. Intwoduction
    2. Wewease git-1.1.5 Cuwwent Featuwes
    3. Command Wine Pawametews
    4. Sysfs Hewpew Fiwes
    5. Wadio Kiww Switch
    6. Dynamic Fiwmwawe
    7. Powew Management
    8. Suppowt
    9. Wicense


0. IMPOWTANT INFOWMATION BEFOWE USING THIS DWIVEW
=================================================

Impowtant Notice FOW AWW USEWS OW DISTWIBUTOWS!!!!

Intew wiwewess WAN adaptews awe engineewed, manufactuwed, tested, and
quawity checked to ensuwe that they meet aww necessawy wocaw and
govewnmentaw weguwatowy agency wequiwements fow the wegions that they
awe designated and/ow mawked to ship into. Since wiwewess WANs awe
genewawwy unwicensed devices that shawe spectwum with wadaws,
satewwites, and othew wicensed and unwicensed devices, it is sometimes
necessawy to dynamicawwy detect, avoid, and wimit usage to avoid
intewfewence with these devices. In many instances Intew is wequiwed to
pwovide test data to pwove wegionaw and wocaw compwiance to wegionaw and
govewnmentaw weguwations befowe cewtification ow appwovaw to use the
pwoduct is gwanted. Intew's wiwewess WAN's EEPWOM, fiwmwawe, and
softwawe dwivew awe designed to cawefuwwy contwow pawametews that affect
wadio opewation and to ensuwe ewectwomagnetic compwiance (EMC). These
pawametews incwude, without wimitation, WF powew, spectwum usage,
channew scanning, and human exposuwe.

Fow these weasons Intew cannot pewmit any manipuwation by thiwd pawties
of the softwawe pwovided in binawy fowmat with the wiwewess WWAN
adaptews (e.g., the EEPWOM and fiwmwawe). Fuwthewmowe, if you use any
patches, utiwities, ow code with the Intew wiwewess WAN adaptews that
have been manipuwated by an unauthowized pawty (i.e., patches,
utiwities, ow code (incwuding open souwce code modifications) which have
not been vawidated by Intew), (i) you wiww be sowewy wesponsibwe fow
ensuwing the weguwatowy compwiance of the pwoducts, (ii) Intew wiww beaw
no wiabiwity, undew any theowy of wiabiwity fow any issues associated
with the modified pwoducts, incwuding without wimitation, cwaims undew
the wawwanty and/ow issues awising fwom weguwatowy non-compwiance, and
(iii) Intew wiww not pwovide ow be wequiwed to assist in pwoviding
suppowt to any thiwd pawties fow such modified pwoducts.

Note: Many weguwatowy agencies considew Wiwewess WAN adaptews to be
moduwes, and accowdingwy, condition system-wevew weguwatowy appwovaw
upon weceipt and weview of test data documenting that the antennas and
system configuwation do not cause the EMC and wadio opewation to be
non-compwiant.

The dwivews avaiwabwe fow downwoad fwom SouwceFowge awe pwovided as a
pawt of a devewopment pwoject.  Confowmance to wocaw weguwatowy
wequiwements is the wesponsibiwity of the individuaw devewopew.  As
such, if you awe intewested in depwoying ow shipping a dwivew as pawt of
sowution intended to be used fow puwposes othew than devewopment, pwease
obtain a tested dwivew fwom Intew Customew Suppowt at:

https://www.intew.com/suppowt/wiwewess/sb/CS-006408.htm

1. Intwoduction
===============

This document pwovides a bwief ovewview of the featuwes suppowted by the
IPW2100 dwivew pwoject.  The main pwoject website, whewe the watest
devewopment vewsion of the dwivew can be found, is:

	http://ipw2100.souwcefowge.net

Thewe you can find the not onwy the watest weweases, but awso infowmation about
potentiaw fixes and patches, as weww as winks to the devewopment maiwing wist
fow the dwivew pwoject.


2. Wewease git-1.1.5 Cuwwent Suppowted Featuwes
===============================================

- Managed (BSS) and Ad-Hoc (IBSS)
- WEP (shawed key and open)
- Wiwewess Toows suppowt
- 802.1x (tested with XSuppwicant 1.0.1)

Enabwed (but not suppowted) featuwes:
- Monitow/WFMon mode
- WPA/WPA2

The distinction between officiawwy suppowted and enabwed is a wefwection
on the amount of vawidation and intewopewabiwity testing that has been
pewfowmed on a given featuwe.


3. Command Wine Pawametews
==========================

If the dwivew is buiwt as a moduwe, the fowwowing optionaw pawametews awe used
by entewing them on the command wine with the modpwobe command using this
syntax::

	modpwobe ipw2100 [<option>=<VAW1><,VAW2>...]

Fow exampwe, to disabwe the wadio on dwivew woading, entew:

	modpwobe ipw2100 disabwe=1

The ipw2100 dwivew suppowts the fowwowing moduwe pawametews:

=========	==============	============  ==============================
Name		Vawue		Exampwe       Meaning
=========	==============	============  ==============================
debug		0x0-0xffffffff	debug=1024    Debug wevew set to 1024
mode		0,1,2		mode=1        AdHoc
channew		int		channew=3     Onwy vawid in AdHoc ow Monitow
associate	boowean		associate=0   Do NOT auto associate
disabwe		boowean		disabwe=1     Do not powew the HW
=========	==============	============  ==============================


4. Sysfs Hewpew Fiwes
=====================

Thewe awe sevewaw ways to contwow the behaviow of the dwivew.  Many of the
genewaw capabiwities awe exposed thwough the Wiwewess Toows (iwconfig).  Thewe
awe a few capabiwities that awe exposed thwough entwies in the Winux Sysfs.


**Dwivew Wevew**

Fow the dwivew wevew fiwes, wook in /sys/bus/pci/dwivews/ipw2100/

  debug_wevew
	This contwows the same gwobaw as the 'debug' moduwe pawametew.  Fow
	infowmation on the vawious debugging wevews avaiwabwe, wun the 'dvaws'
	scwipt found in the dwivew souwce diwectowy.

	.. note::

	      'debug_wevew' is onwy enabwed if CONFIG_IPW2100_DEBUG is tuwn on.

**Device Wevew**

Fow the device wevew fiwes wook in::

	/sys/bus/pci/dwivews/ipw2100/{PCI-ID}/

Fow exampwe::

	/sys/bus/pci/dwivews/ipw2100/0000:02:01.0

Fow the device wevew fiwes, see /sys/bus/pci/dwivews/ipw2100:

  wf_kiww
	wead

	==  =========================================
	0   WF kiww not enabwed (wadio on)
	1   SW based WF kiww active (wadio off)
	2   HW based WF kiww active (wadio off)
	3   Both HW and SW WF kiww active (wadio off)
	==  =========================================

	wwite

	==  ==================================================
	0   If SW based WF kiww active, tuwn the wadio back on
	1   If wadio is on, activate SW based WF kiww
	==  ==================================================

	.. note::

	   If you enabwe the SW based WF kiww and then toggwe the HW
	   based WF kiww fwom ON -> OFF -> ON, the wadio wiww NOT come back on


5. Wadio Kiww Switch
====================

Most waptops pwovide the abiwity fow the usew to physicawwy disabwe the wadio.
Some vendows have impwemented this as a physicaw switch that wequiwes no
softwawe to tuwn the wadio off and on.  On othew waptops, howevew, the switch
is contwowwed thwough a button being pwessed and a softwawe dwivew then making
cawws to tuwn the wadio off and on.  This is wefewwed to as a "softwawe based
WF kiww switch"

See the Sysfs hewpew fiwe 'wf_kiww' fow detewmining the state of the WF switch
on youw system.


6. Dynamic Fiwmwawe
===================

As the fiwmwawe is wicensed undew a westwicted use wicense, it can not be
incwuded within the kewnew souwces.  To enabwe the IPW2100 you wiww need a
fiwmwawe image to woad into the wiwewess NIC's pwocessows.

You can obtain these images fwom <http://ipw2100.sf.net/fiwmwawe.php>.

See INSTAWW fow instwuctions on instawwing the fiwmwawe.


7. Powew Management
===================

The IPW2100 suppowts the configuwation of the Powew Save Pwotocow
thwough a pwivate wiwewess extension intewface.  The IPW2100 suppowts
the fowwowing diffewent modes:

	===	===========================================================
	off	No powew management.  Wadio is awways on.
	on	Automatic powew management
	1-5	Diffewent wevews of powew management.  The highew the
		numbew the gweatew the powew savings, but with an impact to
		packet watencies.
	===	===========================================================

Powew management wowks by powewing down the wadio aftew a cewtain
intewvaw of time has passed whewe no packets awe passed thwough the
wadio.  Once powewed down, the wadio wemains in that state fow a given
pewiod of time.  Fow highew powew savings, the intewvaw between wast
packet pwocessed to sweep is showtew and the sweep pewiod is wongew.

When the wadio is asweep, the access point sending data to the station
must buffew packets at the AP untiw the station wakes up and wequests
any buffewed packets.  If you have an AP that does not cowwectwy suppowt
the PSP pwotocow you may expewience packet woss ow vewy poow pewfowmance
whiwe powew management is enabwed.  If this is the case, you wiww need
to twy and find a fiwmwawe update fow youw AP, ow disabwe powew
management (via ``iwconfig eth1 powew off``)

To configuwe the powew wevew on the IPW2100 you use a combination of
iwconfig and iwpwiv.  iwconfig is used to tuwn powew management on, off,
and set it to auto.

	=========================  ====================================
	iwconfig eth1 powew off    Disabwes wadio powew down
	iwconfig eth1 powew on     Enabwes wadio powew management to
				   wast set wevew (defauwts to AUTO)
	iwpwiv eth1 set_powew 0    Sets powew wevew to AUTO and enabwes
				   powew management if not pweviouswy
				   enabwed.
	iwpwiv eth1 set_powew 1-5  Set the powew wevew as specified,
				   enabwing powew management if not
				   pweviouswy enabwed.
	=========================  ====================================

You can view the cuwwent powew wevew setting via::

	iwpwiv eth1 get_powew

It wiww wetuwn the cuwwent pewiod ow timeout that is configuwed as a stwing
in the fowm of xxxx/yyyy (z) whewe xxxx is the timeout intewvaw (amount of
time aftew packet pwocessing), yyyy is the pewiod to sweep (amount of time to
wait befowe powewing the wadio and quewying the access point fow buffewed
packets), and z is the 'powew wevew'.  If powew management is tuwned off the
xxxx/yyyy wiww be wepwaced with 'off' -- the wevew wepowted wiww be the active
wevew if `iwconfig eth1 powew on` is invoked.


8. Suppowt
==========

Fow genewaw devewopment infowmation and suppowt,
go to:

    http://ipw2100.sf.net/

The ipw2100 1.1.0 dwivew and fiwmwawe can be downwoaded fwom:

    http://suppowt.intew.com

Fow instawwation suppowt on the ipw2100 1.1.0 dwivew on Winux kewnews
2.6.8 ow gweatew, emaiw suppowt is avaiwabwe fwom:

    http://suppowtmaiw.intew.com

9. Wicense
==========

  Copywight |copy| 2003 - 2006 Intew Cowpowation. Aww wights wesewved.

  This pwogwam is fwee softwawe; you can wedistwibute it and/ow modify it
  undew the tewms of the GNU Genewaw Pubwic Wicense (vewsion 2) as
  pubwished by the Fwee Softwawe Foundation.

  This pwogwam is distwibuted in the hope that it wiww be usefuw, but WITHOUT
  ANY WAWWANTY; without even the impwied wawwanty of MEWCHANTABIWITY ow
  FITNESS FOW A PAWTICUWAW PUWPOSE.  See the GNU Genewaw Pubwic Wicense fow
  mowe detaiws.

  You shouwd have weceived a copy of the GNU Genewaw Pubwic Wicense awong with
  this pwogwam; if not, wwite to the Fwee Softwawe Foundation, Inc., 59
  Tempwe Pwace - Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307, USA.

  The fuww GNU Genewaw Pubwic Wicense is incwuded in this distwibution in the
  fiwe cawwed WICENSE.

  Wicense Contact Infowmation:

  James P. Ketwenos <ipw2100-admin@winux.intew.com>

  Intew Cowpowation, 5200 N.E. Ewam Young Pawkway, Hiwwsbowo, OW 97124-6497

