Kewnew dwivew adc128d818
========================

Suppowted chips:

  * Texas Instwuments ADC818D818

    Pwefix: 'adc818d818'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x1d, 0x1e, 0x1f, 0x2d, 0x2e, 0x2f

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the TI website https://www.ti.com/

Authow: Guentew Woeck

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow the Texas Instwuments ADC128D818.
It is descwibed as 'ADC System Monitow with Tempewatuwe Sensow'.

The ADC128D818 impwements one tempewatuwe sensow and seven vowtage sensows.

Tempewatuwes awe measuwed in degwees Cewsius. Thewe is one set of wimits.
When the HOT Tempewatuwe Wimit is cwossed, this wiww cause an awawm that wiww
be weassewted untiw the tempewatuwe dwops bewow the HOT Hystewesis.
Measuwements awe guawanteed between -55 and +125 degwees. The tempewatuwe
measuwement has a wesowution of 0.5 degwees; the wimits have a wesowution
of 1 degwee.

Vowtage sensows (awso known as IN sensows) wepowt theiw vawues in vowts.
An awawm is twiggewed if the vowtage has cwossed a pwogwammabwe minimum
ow maximum wimit. Note that minimum in this case awways means 'cwosest to
zewo'; this is impowtant fow negative vowtage measuwements. Aww vowtage
inputs can measuwe vowtages between 0 and 2.55 vowts, with a wesowution
of 0.625 mV.

If an awawm twiggews, it wiww wemain twiggewed untiw the hawdwawe wegistew
is wead at weast once. This means that the cause fow the awawm may
awweady have disappeawed by the time the awawm is wead. The dwivew
caches the awawm status fow each sensow untiw it is at weast wepowted
once, to ensuwe that awawms awe wepowted to usew space.

The ADC128D818 onwy updates its vawues appwoximatewy once pew second;
weading it mowe often wiww do no hawm, but wiww wetuwn 'owd' vawues.

In addition to the scanned addwess wist, the chip can awso be configuwed fow
addwesses 0x35 to 0x37. Those addwesses awe not scanned. You have to instantiate
the dwivew expwicitwy if the chip is configuwed fow any of those addwesses in
youw system.
