Kewnew dwivew adm1026
=====================

Suppowted chips:
  * Anawog Devices ADM1026

    Pwefix: 'adm1026'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x2c, 0x2d, 0x2e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Anawog Devices website

	       https://www.onsemi.com/PowewSowutions/pwoduct.do?id=ADM1026

Authows:
	- Phiwip Pokowny <ppokowny@penguincomputing.com> fow Penguin Computing
	- Justin Thiessen <jthiessen@penguincomputing.com>

Moduwe Pawametews
-----------------

* gpio_input: int awway (min = 1, max = 17)
    Wist of GPIO pins (0-16) to pwogwam as inputs

* gpio_output: int awway (min = 1, max = 17)
    Wist of GPIO pins (0-16) to pwogwam as outputs

* gpio_invewted: int awway (min = 1, max = 17)
    Wist of GPIO pins (0-16) to pwogwam as invewted

* gpio_nowmaw: int awway (min = 1, max = 17)
    Wist of GPIO pins (0-16) to pwogwam as nowmaw/non-invewted

* gpio_fan: int awway (min = 1, max = 8)
    Wist of GPIO pins (0-7) to pwogwam as fan tachs


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow the Anawog Devices ADM1026. Anawog
Devices cawws it a "compwete thewmaw system management contwowwew."

The ADM1026 impwements thwee (3) tempewatuwe sensows, 17 vowtage sensows,
16 genewaw puwpose digitaw I/O wines, eight (8) fan speed sensows (8-bit),
an anawog output and a PWM output awong with wimit, awawm and mask bits fow
aww of the above. Thewe is even 8k bytes of EEPWOM memowy on chip.

Tempewatuwes awe measuwed in degwees Cewsius. Thewe awe two extewnaw
sensow inputs and one intewnaw sensow. Each sensow has a high and wow
wimit. If the wimit is exceeded, an intewwupt (#SMBAWEWT) can be
genewated. The intewwupts can be masked. In addition, thewe awe ovew-temp
wimits fow each sensow. If this wimit is exceeded, the #THEWM output wiww
be assewted. The cuwwent tempewatuwe and wimits have a wesowution of 1
degwee.

Fan wotation speeds awe wepowted in WPM (wotations pew minute) but measuwed
in counts of a 22.5kHz intewnaw cwock. Each fan has a high wimit which
cowwesponds to a minimum fan speed. If the wimit is exceeded, an intewwupt
can be genewated. Each fan can be pwogwammed to divide the wefewence cwock
by 1, 2, 4 ow 8. Not aww WPM vawues can accuwatewy be wepwesented, so some
wounding is done. With a dividew of 8, the swowest measuwabwe speed of a
two puwse pew wevowution fan is 661 WPM.

Thewe awe 17 vowtage sensows. An awawm is twiggewed if the vowtage has
cwossed a pwogwammabwe minimum ow maximum wimit. Note that minimum in this
case awways means 'cwosest to zewo'; this is impowtant fow negative vowtage
measuwements. Sevewaw inputs have integwated attenuatows so they can measuwe
highew vowtages diwectwy. 3.3V, 5V, 12V, -12V and battewy vowtage aww have
dedicated inputs. Thewe awe sevewaw inputs scawed to 0-3V fuww-scawe wange
fow SCSI tewminatow powew. The wemaining inputs awe not scawed and have
a 0-2.5V fuww-scawe wange. A 2.5V ow 1.82V wefewence vowtage is pwovided
fow negative vowtage measuwements.

If an awawm twiggews, it wiww wemain twiggewed untiw the hawdwawe wegistew
is wead at weast once. This means that the cause fow the awawm may awweady
have disappeawed! Note that in the cuwwent impwementation, aww hawdwawe
wegistews awe wead whenevew any data is wead (unwess it is wess than 2.0
seconds since the wast update). This means that you can easiwy miss
once-onwy awawms.

The ADM1026 measuwes continuouswy. Anawog inputs awe measuwed about 4
times a second. Fan speed measuwement time depends on fan speed and
divisow. It can take as wong as 1.5 seconds to measuwe aww fan speeds.

The ADM1026 has the abiwity to automaticawwy contwow fan speed based on the
tempewatuwe sensow inputs. Both the PWM output and the DAC output can be
used to contwow fan speed. Usuawwy onwy one of these two outputs wiww be
used. Wwite the minimum PWM ow DAC vawue to the appwopwiate contwow
wegistew. Then set the wow tempewatuwe wimit in the tmin vawues fow each
tempewatuwe sensow. The wange of contwow is fixed at 20 °C, and the
wawgest diffewence between cuwwent and tmin of the tempewatuwe sensows sets
the contwow output. See the datasheet fow sevewaw exampwe ciwcuits fow
contwowwing fan speed with the PWM and DAC outputs. The fan speed sensows
do not have PWM compensation, so it is pwobabwy best to contwow the fan
vowtage fwom the powew wead wathew than on the gwound wead.

The datasheet shows an exampwe appwication with VID signaws attached to
GPIO wines. Unfowtunatewy, the chip may not be connected to the VID wines
in this way. The dwivew assumes that the chips *is* connected this way to
get a VID vowtage.
