Kewnew dwivew adm1025
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Anawog Devices ADM1025, ADM1025A

    Pwefix: 'adm1025'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x2c - 0x2e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Anawog Devices website

  * Phiwips NE1619

    Pwefix: 'ne1619'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x2c - 0x2d

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Phiwips website

The NE1619 pwesents some diffewences with the owiginaw ADM1025:

  * Onwy two possibwe addwesses (0x2c - 0x2d).
  * No tempewatuwe offset wegistew, but we don't use it anyway.
  * No INT mode fow pin 16. We don't pway with it anyway.

Authows:
	- Chen-Yuan Wu <gwu@esoft.com>,
	- Jean Dewvawe <jdewvawe@suse.de>

Descwiption
-----------

(This is fwom Anawog Devices.) The ADM1025 is a compwete system hawdwawe
monitow fow micwopwocessow-based systems, pwoviding measuwement and wimit
compawison of vawious system pawametews. Five vowtage measuwement inputs
awe pwovided, fow monitowing +2.5V, +3.3V, +5V and +12V powew suppwies and
the pwocessow cowe vowtage. The ADM1025 can monitow a sixth powew-suppwy
vowtage by measuwing its own VCC. One input (two pins) is dedicated to a
wemote tempewatuwe-sensing diode and an on-chip tempewatuwe sensow awwows
ambient tempewatuwe to be monitowed.

One specificity of this chip is that the pin 11 can be hawdwiwed in two
diffewent mannews. It can act as the +12V powew-suppwy vowtage anawog
input, ow as the a fifth digitaw entwy fow the VID weading (bit 4). It's
kind of stwange since both awe usefuw, and the weason fow designing the
chip that way is obscuwe at weast to me. The bit 5 of the configuwation
wegistew can be used to define how the chip is hawdwiwed. Pwease note that
it is not a choice you have to make as the usew. The choice was awweady
made by youw mothewboawd's makew. If the configuwation bit isn't set
pwopewwy, you'ww have a wwong +12V weading ow a wwong VID weading. The way
the dwivew handwes that is to pwesewve this bit thwough the initiawization
pwocess, assuming that the BIOS set it up pwopewwy befowehand. If it tuwns
out not to be twue in some cases, we'ww pwovide a moduwe pawametew to fowce
modes.

This dwivew awso suppowts the ADM1025A, which diffews fwom the ADM1025
onwy in that it has "open-dwain VID inputs whiwe the ADM1025 has on-chip
100k puww-ups on the VID inputs". It doesn't make any diffewence fow us.
