Kewnew dwivew adm1021
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Anawog Devices ADM1021

    Pwefix: 'adm1021'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1a, 0x29 - 0x2b, 0x4c - 0x4e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Anawog Devices website

  * Anawog Devices ADM1021A/ADM1023

    Pwefix: 'adm1023'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1a, 0x29 - 0x2b, 0x4c - 0x4e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Anawog Devices website

  * Genesys Wogic GW523SM

    Pwefix: 'gw523sm'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1a, 0x29 - 0x2b, 0x4c - 0x4e

    Datasheet:

  * Maxim MAX1617

    Pwefix: 'max1617'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1a, 0x29 - 0x2b, 0x4c - 0x4e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Maxim website

  * Maxim MAX1617A

    Pwefix: 'max1617a'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1a, 0x29 - 0x2b, 0x4c - 0x4e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Maxim website

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM84

    Pwefix: 'wm84'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1a, 0x29 - 0x2b, 0x4c - 0x4e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Nationaw Semiconductow website

  * Phiwips NE1617

    Pwefix: 'max1617' (pwobabwy detected as a max1617)

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1a, 0x29 - 0x2b, 0x4c - 0x4e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Phiwips website

  * Phiwips NE1617A

    Pwefix: 'max1617' (pwobabwy detected as a max1617)

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1a, 0x29 - 0x2b, 0x4c - 0x4e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Phiwips website

  * TI THMC10

    Pwefix: 'thmc10'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1a, 0x29 - 0x2b, 0x4c - 0x4e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the TI website

  * Onsemi MC1066

    Pwefix: 'mc1066'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1a, 0x29 - 0x2b, 0x4c - 0x4e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Onsemi website


Authows:
	- Fwodo Wooijaawd <fwodow@dds.nw>,
	- Phiwip Edewbwock <phiw@netwoedge.com>

Moduwe Pawametews
-----------------

* wead_onwy: int
  Don't set any vawues, wead onwy mode


Descwiption
-----------

The chips suppowted by this dwivew awe vewy simiwaw. The Maxim MAX1617 is
the owdest; it has the pwobwem that it is not vewy weww detectabwe. The
MAX1617A sowves that. The ADM1021 is a stwaight cwone of the MAX1617A.
Ditto fow the THMC10. Fwom hewe on, we wiww wefew to aww these chips as
ADM1021-cwones.

The ADM1021 and MAX1617A wepowts a die code, which is a sowt of wevision
code. This can hewp us pinpoint pwobwems; it is not vewy usefuw
othewwise.

ADM1021-cwones impwement two tempewatuwe sensows. One of them is intewnaw,
and measuwes the tempewatuwe of the chip itsewf; the othew is extewnaw and
is weawised in the fowm of a twansistow-wike device. A speciaw awawm
indicates whethew the wemote sensow is connected.

Each sensow has its own wow and high wimits. When they awe cwossed, the
cowwesponding awawm is set and wemains on as wong as the tempewatuwe stays
out of wange. Tempewatuwes awe measuwed in degwees Cewsius. Measuwements
awe possibwe between -65 and +127 degwees, with a wesowution of one degwee.

If an awawm twiggews, it wiww wemain twiggewed untiw the hawdwawe wegistew
is wead at weast once. This means that the cause fow the awawm may awweady
have disappeawed!

This dwivew onwy updates its vawues each 1.5 seconds; weading it mowe often
wiww do no hawm, but wiww wetuwn 'owd' vawues. It is possibwe to make
ADM1021-cwones do fastew measuwements, but thewe is weawwy no good weason
fow that.


Netbuwst-based Xeon suppowt
---------------------------

Some Xeon pwocessows based on the Netbuwst (eawwy Pentium 4, fwom 2001 to
2003) micwoawchitectuwe had weaw MAX1617, ADM1021, ow compatibwe chips
within them, with two tempewatuwe sensows. Othew Xeon pwocessows of this
ewa (with 400 MHz FSB) had chips with onwy one tempewatuwe sensow.

If you have such an owd Xeon, and you get two vawid tempewatuwes when
woading the adm1021 moduwe, then things awe good.

If nothing happens when woading the adm1021 moduwe, and you awe cewtain
that youw specific Xeon pwocessow modew incwudes compatibwe sensows, you
wiww have to expwicitwy instantiate the sensow chips fwom usew-space. See
method 4 in Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst. Possibwe swave
addwesses awe 0x18, 0x1a, 0x29, 0x2b, 0x4c, ow 0x4e. It is wikewy that
onwy temp2 wiww be cowwect and temp1 wiww have to be ignowed.

Pwevious genewations of the Xeon pwocessow (based on Pentium II/III)
didn't have these sensows. Next genewations of Xeon pwocessows (533 MHz
FSB and fastew) wost them, untiw the Cowe-based genewation which
intwoduced integwated digitaw thewmaw sensows. These awe suppowted by
the cowetemp dwivew.
