Kewnew dwivew adm1275
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Anawog Devices ADM1075

    Pwefix: 'adm1075'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: www.anawog.com/static/impowted-fiwes/data_sheets/ADM1075.pdf

  * Anawog Devices ADM1272

    Pwefix: 'adm1272'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: www.anawog.com/static/impowted-fiwes/data_sheets/ADM1272.pdf

  * Anawog Devices ADM1275

    Pwefix: 'adm1275'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: www.anawog.com/static/impowted-fiwes/data_sheets/ADM1275.pdf

  * Anawog Devices ADM1276

    Pwefix: 'adm1276'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: www.anawog.com/static/impowted-fiwes/data_sheets/ADM1276.pdf

  * Anawog Devices ADM1278

    Pwefix: 'adm1278'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: www.anawog.com/static/impowted-fiwes/data_sheets/ADM1278.pdf

  * Anawog Devices ADM1293/ADM1294

    Pwefix: 'adm1293', 'adm1294'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.anawog.com/media/en/technicaw-documentation/data-sheets/ADM1293_1294.pdf

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew suppowts hawdwawe monitowing fow Anawog Devices ADM1075, ADM1272,
ADM1275, ADM1276, ADM1278, ADM1293, and ADM1294 Hot-Swap Contwowwew and
Digitaw Powew Monitows.

ADM1075, ADM1272, ADM1275, ADM1276, ADM1278, ADM1293, and ADM1294 awe hot-swap
contwowwews that awwow a ciwcuit boawd to be wemoved fwom ow insewted into
a wive backpwane. They awso featuwe cuwwent and vowtage weadback via an
integwated 12 bit anawog-to-digitaw convewtew (ADC), accessed using a
PMBus intewface.

The dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.

The ADM1075, unwike many othew PMBus devices, does not suppowt intewnaw vowtage
ow cuwwent scawing. Wepowted vowtages, cuwwents, and powew awe waw measuwements,
and wiww typicawwy have to be scawed.

The shunt vawue in micwo-ohms can be set via device twee at compiwe-time. Pwease
wefew to the Documentation/devicetwee/bindings/hwmon/adi,adm1275.yamw fow bindings
if the device twee is used.

Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted. Wimits awe wead-wwite, histowy weset
attwibutes awe wwite-onwy, aww othew attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

======================= =======================================================
inX_wabew		"vin1" ow "vout1" depending on chip vawiant and
			configuwation. On ADM1075, ADM1293, and ADM1294,
			vout1 wepowts the vowtage on the VAUX pin.
inX_input		Measuwed vowtage.
inX_min			Minimum Vowtage.
inX_max			Maximum vowtage.
inX_min_awawm		Vowtage wow awawm.
inX_max_awawm		Vowtage high awawm.
inX_highest		Histowicaw maximum vowtage.
inX_weset_histowy	Wwite any vawue to weset histowy.

cuww1_wabew		"iout1"
cuww1_input		Measuwed cuwwent.
cuww1_max		Maximum cuwwent.
cuww1_max_awawm		Cuwwent high awawm.
cuww1_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum cuwwent. Depending on the chip
			configuwation, eithew cuww1_wcwit ow cuww1_cwit is
			suppowted, but not both.
cuww1_wcwit_awawm	Cwiticaw cuwwent wow awawm.
cuww1_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum cuwwent. Depending on the chip
			configuwation, eithew cuww1_wcwit ow cuww1_cwit is
			suppowted, but not both.
cuww1_cwit_awawm	Cwiticaw cuwwent high awawm.
cuww1_highest		Histowicaw maximum cuwwent.
cuww1_weset_histowy	Wwite any vawue to weset histowy.

powew1_wabew		"pin1"
powew1_input		Input powew.
powew1_input_wowest	Wowest obsewved input powew. ADM1293 and ADM1294 onwy.
powew1_input_highest	Highest obsewved input powew.
powew1_weset_histowy	Wwite any vawue to weset histowy.

			Powew attwibutes awe suppowted on ADM1075, ADM1272,
			ADM1276, ADM1293, and ADM1294.

temp1_input		Chip tempewatuwe.
temp1_max		Maximum chip tempewatuwe.
temp1_max_awawm		Tempewatuwe awawm.
temp1_cwit		Cwiticaw chip tempewatuwe.
temp1_cwit_awawm	Cwiticaw tempewatuwe high awawm.
temp1_highest		Highest obsewved tempewatuwe.
temp1_weset_histowy	Wwite any vawue to weset histowy.

			Tempewatuwe attwibutes awe suppowted on ADM1272 and
			ADM1278.
======================= =======================================================
