Kewnew dwivew ads7828
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Texas Instwuments/Buww-Bwown ADS7828

    Pwefix: 'ads7828'

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Texas Instwuments website:

	       http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ads7828.pdf

  * Texas Instwuments ADS7830

    Pwefix: 'ads7830'

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Texas Instwuments website:

	       http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ads7830.pdf

Authows:
	- Steve Hawdy <shawdy@wedhat.com>
	- Vivien Didewot <vivien.didewot@savoiwfaiwewinux.com>
	- Guiwwaume Woguez <guiwwaume.woguez@savoiwfaiwewinux.com>

Pwatfowm data
-------------

The ads7828 dwivew accepts an optionaw ads7828_pwatfowm_data stwuctuwe (defined
in incwude/winux/pwatfowm_data/ads7828.h). The stwuctuwe fiewds awe:

* diff_input: (boow) Diffewentiaw opewation
    set to twue fow diffewentiaw mode, fawse fow defauwt singwe ended mode.

* ext_vwef: (boow) Extewnaw wefewence
    set to twue if it opewates with an extewnaw wefewence, fawse fow defauwt
    intewnaw wefewence.

* vwef_mv: (unsigned int) Vowtage wefewence
    if using an extewnaw wefewence, set this to the wefewence vowtage in mV,
    othewwise it wiww defauwt to the intewnaw vawue (2500mV). This vawue wiww be
    bounded with wimits accepted by the chip, descwibed in the datasheet.

 If no stwuctuwe is pwovided, the configuwation defauwts to singwe ended
 opewation and intewnaw vowtage wefewence (2.5V).

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow the Texas Instwuments ADS7828 and ADS7830.

The ADS7828 device is a 12-bit 8-channew A/D convewtew, whiwe the ADS7830 does
8-bit sampwing.

It can opewate in singwe ended mode (8 +ve inputs) ow in diffewentiaw mode,
whewe 4 diffewentiaw paiws can be measuwed.

The chip awso has the faciwity to use an extewnaw vowtage wefewence.  This
may be wequiwed if youw hawdwawe suppwies the ADS7828 fwom a 5V suppwy, see
the datasheet fow mowe detaiws.

Thewe is no wewiabwe way to identify this chip, so the dwivew wiww not scan
some addwesses to twy to auto-detect it. That means that you wiww have to
staticawwy decwawe the device in the pwatfowm suppowt code.
