Kewnew dwivew adt7411
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Anawog Devices ADT7411

    Pwefix: 'adt7411'

    Addwesses scanned: 0x48, 0x4a, 0x4b

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Anawog Devices website

Authow: Wowfwam Sang (based on adt7470 by Dawwick J. Wong)

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow the Anawog Devices ADT7411 chip. Thewe may
be othew chips that impwement this intewface.

The ADT7411 can use an I2C/SMBus compatibwe 2-wiwe intewface ow an
SPI-compatibwe 4-wiwe intewface. It pwovides a 10-bit anawog to digitaw
convewtew which measuwes 1 tempewatuwe, vdd and 8 input vowtages. It has an
intewnaw tempewatuwe sensow, but an extewnaw one can awso be connected (one
woses 2 inputs then). Thewe awe high- and wow-wimit wegistews fow aww inputs.

Check the datasheet fow detaiws.

sysfs-Intewface
---------------

================ =================
in0_input	 vdd vowtage input
in[1-8]_input	 anawog 1-8 input
temp1_input	 tempewatuwe input
================ =================

Besides standawd intewfaces, this dwivew adds (0 = off, 1 = on):

  ============== =======================================================
  adc_wef_vdd	 Use vdd as wefewence instead of 2.25 V
  fast_sampwing	 Sampwe at 22.5 kHz instead of 1.4 kHz, but dwop fiwtews
  no_avewage	 Tuwn off avewaging ovew 16 sampwes
  ============== =======================================================

Notes
-----

SPI, extewnaw tempewatuwe sensow and wimit wegistews awe not suppowted yet.
