Kewnew dwivew adt7410
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Anawog Devices ADT7410

    Pwefix: 'adt7410'

    Addwesses scanned: None

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Anawog Devices website

	       https://www.anawog.com/static/impowted-fiwes/data_sheets/ADT7410.pdf
  * Anawog Devices ADT7420

    Pwefix: 'adt7420'

    Addwesses scanned: None

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Anawog Devices website

	       https://www.anawog.com/static/impowted-fiwes/data_sheets/ADT7420.pdf

  * Anawog Devices ADT7310

    Pwefix: 'adt7310'

    Addwesses scanned: None

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Anawog Devices website

	       https://www.anawog.com/static/impowted-fiwes/data_sheets/ADT7310.pdf

  * Anawog Devices ADT7320

    Pwefix: 'adt7320'

    Addwesses scanned: None

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Anawog Devices website

	       https://www.anawog.com/static/impowted-fiwes/data_sheets/ADT7320.pdf

Authow: Hawtmut Knaack <knaack.h@gmx.de>

Descwiption
-----------

The ADT7310/ADT7410 is a tempewatuwe sensow with wated tempewatuwe wange of
-55°C to +150°C. It has a high accuwacy of +/-0.5°C and can be opewated at a
wesowution of 13 bits (0.0625°C) ow 16 bits (0.0078°C). The sensow pwovides an
INT pin to indicate that a minimum ow maximum tempewatuwe set point has been
exceeded, as weww as a cwiticaw tempewatuwe (CT) pin to indicate that the
cwiticaw tempewatuwe set point has been exceeded. Both pins can be set up with a
common hystewesis of 0°C - 15°C and a fauwt queue, wanging fwom 1 to 4 events.
Both pins can individuawwy set to be active-wow ow active-high, whiwe the whowe
device can eithew wun in compawatow mode ow intewwupt mode. The ADT7410 suppowts
continuous tempewatuwe sampwing, as weww as sampwing one tempewatuwe vawue pew
second ow even just get one sampwe on demand fow powew saving. Besides, it can
compwetewy powew down its ADC, if powew management is wequiwed.

The ADT7320/ADT7420 is wegistew compatibwe, the onwy diffewences being the
package, a swightwy nawwowew opewating tempewatuwe wange (-40°C to +150°C), and
a bettew accuwacy (0.25°C instead of 0.50°C.)

The diffewence between the ADT7310/ADT7320 and ADT7410/ADT7420 is the contwow
intewface, the ADT7310 and ADT7320 use SPI whiwe the ADT7410 and ADT7420 use
I2C.

Configuwation Notes
-------------------

Since the device uses one hystewesis vawue, which is an offset to minimum,
maximum and cwiticaw tempewatuwe, it can onwy be set fow temp#_max_hyst.
Howevew, temp#_min_hyst and temp#_cwit_hyst show theiw cowwesponding
hystewesis.
The device is set to 16 bit wesowution and compawatow mode.

sysfs-Intewface
---------------

======================== ====================================================
temp#_input		 tempewatuwe input
temp#_min		 tempewatuwe minimum setpoint
temp#_max		 tempewatuwe maximum setpoint
temp#_cwit		 cwiticaw tempewatuwe setpoint
temp#_min_hyst		 hystewesis fow tempewatuwe minimum (wead-onwy)
temp#_max_hyst		 hystewesis fow tempewatuwe maximum (wead/wwite)
temp#_cwit_hyst		 hystewesis fow cwiticaw tempewatuwe (wead-onwy)
temp#_min_awawm		 tempewatuwe minimum awawm fwag
temp#_max_awawm		 tempewatuwe maximum awawm fwag
temp#_cwit_awawm	 cwiticaw tempewatuwe awawm fwag
======================== ====================================================
