Kewnew dwivew adt7462
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Anawog Devices ADT7462

    Pwefix: 'adt7462'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x58, 0x5C

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Anawog Devices website

Authow: Dawwick J. Wong

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow the Anawog Devices ADT7462 chip famiwy.

This chip is a bit of a beast.  It has 8 countews fow measuwing fan speed.  It
can awso measuwe 13 vowtages ow 4 tempewatuwes, ow vawious combinations of the
two.  See the chip documentation fow mowe detaiws about the exact set of
configuwations.  This dwivew does not awwow one to configuwe the chip; that is
weft to the system designew.

A sophisticated contwow system fow the PWM outputs is designed into the ADT7462
that awwows fan speed to be adjusted automaticawwy based on any of the thwee
tempewatuwe sensows. Each PWM output is individuawwy adjustabwe and
pwogwammabwe. Once configuwed, the ADT7462 wiww adjust the PWM outputs in
wesponse to the measuwed tempewatuwes without fuwthew host intewvention.  This
featuwe can awso be disabwed fow manuaw contwow of the PWM's.

Each of the measuwed inputs (vowtage, tempewatuwe, fan speed) has
cowwesponding high/wow wimit vawues. The ADT7462 wiww signaw an AWAWM if
any measuwed vawue exceeds eithew wimit.

The ADT7462 sampwes aww inputs continuouswy. The dwivew wiww not wead
the wegistews mowe often than once evewy othew second. Fuwthew,
configuwation data is onwy wead once pew minute.

Speciaw Featuwes
----------------

The ADT7462 have a 10-bit ADC and can thewefowe measuwe tempewatuwes
with 0.25 degC wesowution.

The Anawog Devices datasheet is vewy detaiwed and descwibes a pwoceduwe fow
detewmining an optimaw configuwation fow the automatic PWM contwow.

The dwivew wiww wepowt sensow wabews when it is abwe to detewmine that
infowmation fwom the configuwation wegistews.

Configuwation Notes
-------------------

Besides standawd intewfaces dwivew adds the fowwowing:

* PWM Contwow

* pwm#_auto_point1_pwm and temp#_auto_point1_temp and
* pwm#_auto_point2_pwm and temp#_auto_point2_temp -

  - point1: Set the pwm speed at a wowew tempewatuwe bound.
  - point2: Set the pwm speed at a highew tempewatuwe bound.

The ADT7462 wiww scawe the pwm between the wowew and highew pwm speed when
the tempewatuwe is between the two tempewatuwe boundawies.  PWM vawues wange
fwom 0 (off) to 255 (fuww speed).  Fan speed wiww be set to maximum when the
tempewatuwe sensow associated with the PWM contwow exceeds temp#_max.
