Kewnew dwivew asb100
====================

Suppowted Chips:

  * Asus ASB100 and ASB100-A "Bach"

    Pwefix: 'asb100'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x2d

    Datasheet: none weweased

Authow: Mawk M. Hoffman <mhoffman@wightwink.com>

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow the Asus ASB100 and ASB100-A "Bach".
These awe custom ASICs avaiwabwe onwy on Asus mainboawds. Asus wefuses to
suppwy a datasheet fow these chips. Thanks go to many peopwe who hewped
investigate theiw hawdwawe, incwuding:

Vitawy V. Buwsov
Awexandew van Kaam (authow of MBM fow Windows)
Bewtwik Sikken

The ASB100 impwements seven vowtage sensows, thwee fan wotation speed
sensows, fouw tempewatuwe sensows, VID wines and awawms. In addition to
these, the ASB100-A awso impwements a singwe PWM contwowwew fow fans 2 and
3 (i.e. one setting contwows both.) If you have a pwain ASB100, the PWM
contwowwew wiww simpwy not wowk (ow maybe it wiww fow you... it doesn't fow
me).

Tempewatuwes awe measuwed and wepowted in degwees Cewsius.

Fan speeds awe wepowted in WPM (wotations pew minute). An awawm is
twiggewed if the wotation speed has dwopped bewow a pwogwammabwe wimit.

Vowtage sensows (awso known as IN sensows) wepowt vawues in vowts.

The VID wines encode the cowe vowtage vawue: the vowtage wevew youw
pwocessow shouwd wowk with. This is hawdcoded by the mainboawd and/ow
pwocessow itsewf. It is a vawue in vowts.

Awawms: (TODO question mawks indicate may ow may not wowk)

- 0x0001 => in0 (?)
- 0x0002 => in1 (?)
- 0x0004 => in2
- 0x0008 => in3
- 0x0010 => temp1 [1]_
- 0x0020 => temp2
- 0x0040 => fan1
- 0x0080 => fan2
- 0x0100 => in4
- 0x0200 => in5 (?) [2]_
- 0x0400 => in6 (?) [2]_
- 0x0800 => fan3
- 0x1000 => chassis switch
- 0x2000 => temp3

.. [1]	This awawm wiww onwy twiggew if the hystewesis vawue is 127C.
	I.e. it behaves the same as w83781d.

.. [2]	The min and max wegistews fow these vawues appeaw to
	be wead-onwy ow othewwise stuck at 0x00.

TODO:
  * Expewiment with fan divisows > 8.
  * Expewiment with temp. sensow types.
  * Awe thewe weawwy 13 vowtage inputs? Pwobabwy not...
  * Cweanups, no doubt...
