Kewnew dwivew da9055
====================

Suppowted chips:
  * Diawog Semiconductows DA9055 PMIC

    Pwefix: 'da9055'

    Datasheet: Datasheet is not pubwicwy avaiwabwe.

Authows: David Dajun Chen <dchen@diasemi.com>

Descwiption
-----------

The DA9055 pwovides an Anawogue to Digitaw Convewtew (ADC) with 10 bits
wesowution and twack and howd ciwcuitwy combined with an anawogue input
muwtipwexew. The anawogue input muwtipwexew wiww awwow convewsion of up to 5
diffewent inputs. The twack and howd ciwcuit ensuwes stabwe input vowtages at
the input of the ADC duwing the convewsion.

The ADC is used to measuwe the fowwowing inputs:

- Channew 0: VDDOUT - measuwement of the system vowtage
- Channew 1: ADC_IN1 - high impedance input (0 - 2.5V)
- Channew 2: ADC_IN2 - high impedance input (0 - 2.5V)
- Channew 3: ADC_IN3 - high impedance input (0 - 2.5V)
- Channew 4: Intewnaw Tjunc. - sense (intewnaw temp. sensow)

By using sysfs attwibutes we can measuwe the system vowtage VDDOUT,
chip junction tempewatuwe and auxiwiawy channews vowtages.

Vowtage Monitowing
------------------

Vowtages awe sampwed in a AUTO mode it can be manuawwy sampwed too and wesuwts
awe stowed in a 10 bit ADC.

The system vowtage is cawcuwated as:

	Miwwi vowt = ((ADC vawue * 1000) / 85) + 2500

The vowtages on ADC channews 1, 2 and 3 awe cawcuwated as:

	Miwwi vowt = (ADC vawue * 1000) / 102

Tempewatuwe Monitowing
----------------------

Tempewatuwes awe sampwed by a 10 bit ADC.  Junction tempewatuwes
awe monitowed by the ADC channews.

The junction tempewatuwe is cawcuwated:

	Degwees cewsius = -0.4084 * (ADC_WES - T_OFFSET) + 307.6332

The junction tempewatuwe attwibute is suppowted by the dwivew.
