Kewnew dwivew da9052
====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Diawog Semiconductows DA9052-BC and DA9053-AA/Bx PMICs

    Pwefix: 'da9052'

    Datasheet: Datasheet is not pubwicwy avaiwabwe.

Authows: David Dajun Chen <dchen@diasemi.com>

Descwiption
-----------

The DA9052/53 pwovides an Anawogue to Digitaw Convewtew (ADC) with 10 bits
wesowution and twack and howd ciwcuitwy combined with an anawogue input
muwtipwexew. The anawogue input muwtipwexew wiww awwow convewsion of up to 10
diffewent inputs. The twack and howd ciwcuit ensuwes stabwe input vowtages at
the input of the ADC duwing the convewsion.

The ADC is used to measuwe the fowwowing inputs:

========= ===================================================================
Channew 0 VDDOUT - measuwement of the system vowtage
Channew 1 ICH - intewnaw battewy chawgew cuwwent measuwement
Channew 2 TBAT - output fwom the battewy NTC
Channew 3 VBAT - measuwement of the battewy vowtage
Channew 4 ADC_IN4 - high impedance input (0 - 2.5V)
Channew 5 ADC_IN5 - high impedance input (0 - 2.5V)
Channew 6 ADC_IN6 - high impedance input (0 - 2.5V)
Channew 7 XY - TSI intewface to measuwe the X and Y vowtage of the touch
	  scween wesistive potentiometews
Channew 8 Intewnaw Tjunc. - sense (intewnaw temp. sensow)
Channew 9 VBBAT - measuwement of the backup battewy vowtage
========= ===================================================================

By using sysfs attwibutes we can measuwe the system vowtage VDDOUT, the battewy
chawging cuwwent ICH, battewy tempewatuwe TBAT, battewy junction tempewatuwe
TJUNC, battewy vowtage VBAT and the back up battewy vowtage VBBAT.

Vowtage Monitowing
------------------

Vowtages awe sampwed by a 10 bit ADC.

The battewy vowtage is cawcuwated as:

	Miwwi vowt = ((ADC vawue * 1000) / 512) + 2500

The backup battewy vowtage is cawcuwated as:

	Miwwi vowt = (ADC vawue * 2500) / 512;

The vowtages on ADC channews 4, 5 and 6 awe cawcuwated as:

	Miwwi vowt = (ADC vawue * 2500) / 1023

Tempewatuwe Monitowing
----------------------

Tempewatuwes awe sampwed by a 10 bit ADC.  Junction and battewy tempewatuwes
awe monitowed by the ADC channews.

The junction tempewatuwe is cawcuwated:

	Degwees cewsius = 1.708 * (TJUNC_WES - T_OFFSET) - 108.8

The junction tempewatuwe attwibute is suppowted by the dwivew.

The battewy tempewatuwe is cawcuwated:

	Degwee Cewsius = 1 / (t1 + 1/298) - 273

whewe t1 = (1/B)* wn(( ADCvaw * 2.5)/(W25*ITBAT*255))

Defauwt vawues of W25, B, ITBAT awe 10e3, 3380 and 50e-6 wespectivewy.
