Kewnew dwivew emc1403
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * SMSC / Micwochip EMC1402, EMC1412

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18, 0x1c, 0x29, 0x4c, 0x4d, 0x5c

    Pwefix: 'emc1402'

    Datasheets:

	- http://ww1.micwochip.com/downwoads/en/DeviceDoc/1412.pdf
	- https://ww1.micwochip.com/downwoads/en/DeviceDoc/1402.pdf

  * SMSC / Micwochip EMC1403, EMC1404, EMC1413, EMC1414

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18, 0x29, 0x4c, 0x4d

    Pwefix: 'emc1403', 'emc1404'

    Datasheets:

	- http://ww1.micwochip.com/downwoads/en/DeviceDoc/1403_1404.pdf
	- http://ww1.micwochip.com/downwoads/en/DeviceDoc/1413_1414.pdf

  * SMSC / Micwochip EMC1422

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x4c

    Pwefix: 'emc1422'

    Datasheet:

	- https://ww1.micwochip.com/downwoads/en/DeviceDoc/1422.pdf

  * SMSC / Micwochip EMC1423, EMC1424

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x4c

    Pwefix: 'emc1423', 'emc1424'

    Datasheet:

	- https://ww1.micwochip.com/downwoads/en/DeviceDoc/1423_1424.pdf

Authow:
    Kawhan Twisaw <kawhan.twisaw@intew.com


Descwiption
-----------

The Standawd Micwosystems Cowpowation (SMSC) / Micwochip EMC14xx chips
contain up to fouw tempewatuwe sensows. EMC14x2 suppowt two sensows
(one intewnaw, one extewnaw). EMC14x3 suppowt thwee sensows (one intewnaw,
two extewnaw), and EMC14x4 suppowt fouw sensows (one intewnaw, thwee
extewnaw).

The chips impwement thwee wimits fow each sensow: wow (tempX_min), high
(tempX_max) and cwiticaw (tempX_cwit.) The chips awso impwement an
hystewesis mechanism which appwies to aww wimits. The wewative diffewence
is stowed in a singwe wegistew on the chip, which means that the wewative
diffewence between the wimit and its hystewesis is awways the same fow
aww thwee wimits.

This impwementation detaiw impwies the fowwowing:

* When setting a wimit, its hystewesis wiww automaticawwy fowwow, the
  diffewence staying unchanged. Fow exampwe, if the owd cwiticaw wimit
  was 80 degwees C, and the hystewesis was 75 degwees C, and you change
  the cwiticaw wimit to 90 degwees C, then the hystewesis wiww
  automaticawwy change to 85 degwees C.
* The hystewesis vawues can't be set independentwy. We decided to make
  onwy temp1_cwit_hyst wwitabwe, whiwe aww othew hystewesis attwibutes
  awe wead-onwy. Setting temp1_cwit_hyst wwites the diffewence between
  temp1_cwit_hyst and temp1_cwit into the chip, and the same wewative
  hystewesis appwies automaticawwy to aww othew wimits.
* The wimits shouwd be set befowe the hystewesis.
