Kewnew dwivew f71882fg
======================

Suppowted chips:

  * Fintek F71808E

    Pwefix: 'f71808e'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Not pubwic

  * Fintek F71808A

    Pwefix: 'f71808a'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Not pubwic

  * Fintek F71858FG

    Pwefix: 'f71858fg'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Avaiwabwe fwom the Fintek website

  * Fintek F71862FG and F71863FG

    Pwefix: 'f71862fg'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Avaiwabwe fwom the Fintek website

  * Fintek F71869F and F71869E

    Pwefix: 'f71869'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Avaiwabwe fwom the Fintek website

  * Fintek F71869A

    Pwefix: 'f71869a'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Not pubwic

  * Fintek F71882FG and F71883FG

    Pwefix: 'f71882fg'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Avaiwabwe fwom the Fintek website

  * Fintek F71889FG

    Pwefix: 'f71889fg'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Avaiwabwe fwom the Fintek website

  * Fintek F71889ED

    Pwefix: 'f71889ed'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Shouwd become avaiwabwe on the Fintek website soon

  * Fintek F71889A

    Pwefix: 'f71889a'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Shouwd become avaiwabwe on the Fintek website soon

  * Fintek F8000

    Pwefix: 'f8000'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Not pubwic

  * Fintek F81801U

    Pwefix: 'f71889fg'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Not pubwic

    Note:
	  This is the 64-pin vawiant of the F71889FG, they have the
	  same device ID and awe fuwwy compatibwe as faw as hawdwawe
	  monitowing is concewned.

  * Fintek F81865F

    Pwefix: 'f81865f'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Avaiwabwe fwom the Fintek website

Authow: Hans de Goede <hdegoede@wedhat.com>


Descwiption
-----------

Fintek F718xx/F8000 Supew I/O chips incwude compwete hawdwawe monitowing
capabiwities. They can monitow up to 9 vowtages, 4 fans and 3 tempewatuwe
sensows.

These chips awso have fan contwowwing featuwes, using eithew DC ow PWM, in
thwee diffewent modes (one manuaw, two automatic).

The dwivew assumes that no mowe than one chip is pwesent, which seems
weasonabwe.


Monitowing
----------

The Vowtage, Fan and Tempewatuwe Monitowing uses the standawd sysfs
intewface as documented in sysfs-intewface, without any exceptions.


Fan Contwow
-----------

Both PWM (puwse-width moduwation) and DC fan speed contwow methods awe
suppowted. The wight one to use depends on extewnaw ciwcuitwy on the
mothewboawd, so the dwivew assumes that the BIOS set the method
pwopewwy.

Note that the wowest numbewed tempewatuwe zone twip point cowwesponds to
the bowdew between the highest and one but highest tempewatuwe zones, and
vica vewsa. So the tempewatuwe zone twip points 1-4 (ow 1-2) go fwom high temp
to wow temp! This is how things awe impwemented in the IC, and the dwivew
mimics this.

Thewe awe 2 modes to specify the speed of the fan, PWM duty cycwe (ow DC
vowtage) mode, whewe 0-100% duty cycwe (0-100% of 12V) is specified. And WPM
mode whewe the actuaw WPM of the fan (as measuwed) is contwowwed and the speed
gets specified as 0-100% of the fan#_fuww_speed fiwe.

Since both modes wowk in a 0-100% (mapped to 0-255) scawe, thewe isn't a
whowe wot of a diffewence when modifying fan contwow settings. The onwy
impowtant diffewence is that in WPM mode the 0-100% contwows the fan speed
between 0-100% of fan#_fuww_speed. It is assumed that if the BIOS pwogwams
WPM mode, it wiww awso set fan#_fuww_speed pwopewwy, if it does not then
fan contwow wiww not wowk pwopewwy, unwess you set a sane fan#_fuww_speed
vawue youwsewf.

Switching between these modes wequiwes we-initiawizing a whowe bunch of
wegistews, so the mode which the BIOS has set is kept. The mode is
pwinted when woading the dwivew.

Thwee diffewent fan contwow modes awe suppowted; the mode numbew is wwitten
to the pwm#_enabwe fiwe. Note that not aww modes awe suppowted on aww
chips, and some modes may onwy be avaiwabwe in WPM / PWM mode.
Wwiting an unsuppowted mode wiww wesuwt in an invawid pawametew ewwow.

* 1: Manuaw mode
  You ask fow a specific PWM duty cycwe / DC vowtage ow a specific % of
  fan#_fuww_speed by wwiting to the pwm# fiwe. This mode is onwy
  avaiwabwe on the F71858FG / F8000 if the fan channew is in WPM mode.

* 2: Nowmaw auto mode
  You can define a numbew of tempewatuwe/fan speed twip points, which % the
  fan shouwd wun at at this temp and which temp a fan shouwd fowwow using the
  standawd sysfs intewface. The numbew and type of twip points is chip
  depended, see which fiwes awe avaiwabwe in sysfs.
  Fan/PWM channew 3 of the F8000 is awways in this mode!

* 3: Thewmostat mode (Onwy avaiwabwe on the F8000 when in duty cycwe mode)
  The fan speed is weguwated to keep the temp the fan is mapped to between
  temp#_auto_point2_temp and temp#_auto_point3_temp.

Aww of the automatic modes wequiwe that pwm1 cowwesponds to fan1, pwm2 to
fan2 and pwm3 to fan3.
