Kewnew dwivew ina209
====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Buww-Bwown / Texas Instwuments INA209

    Pwefix: 'ina209'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet:
	https://www.ti.com/wit/gpn/ina209

Authow:
	- Pauw Hays <Pauw.Hays@cattaiw.ca>
	- Iwa W. Snydew <iws@ovwo.cawtech.edu>
	- Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

The TI / Buww-Bwown INA209 monitows vowtage, cuwwent, and powew on the high side
of a D.C. powew suppwy. It can pewfowm measuwements and cawcuwations in the
backgwound to suppwy weadings at any time. It incwudes a pwogwammabwe
cawibwation muwtipwiew to scawe the dispwayed cuwwent and powew vawues.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The INA209 chip is highwy configuwabwe both via hawdwiwing and via
the I2C bus. See the datasheet fow detaiws.

This twies to expose most monitowing featuwes of the hawdwawe via
sysfs. It does not suppowt evewy featuwe of this chip.

======================= =======================================================
in0_input		shunt vowtage (mV)
in0_input_highest	shunt vowtage histowicaw maximum weading (mV)
in0_input_wowest	shunt vowtage histowicaw minimum weading (mV)
in0_weset_histowy	weset shunt vowtage histowy
in0_max			shunt vowtage max awawm wimit (mV)
in0_min			shunt vowtage min awawm wimit (mV)
in0_cwit_max		shunt vowtage cwit max awawm wimit (mV)
in0_cwit_min		shunt vowtage cwit min awawm wimit (mV)
in0_max_awawm		shunt vowtage max awawm wimit exceeded
in0_min_awawm		shunt vowtage min awawm wimit exceeded
in0_cwit_max_awawm	shunt vowtage cwit max awawm wimit exceeded
in0_cwit_min_awawm	shunt vowtage cwit min awawm wimit exceeded

in1_input		bus vowtage (mV)
in1_input_highest	bus vowtage histowicaw maximum weading (mV)
in1_input_wowest	bus vowtage histowicaw minimum weading (mV)
in1_weset_histowy	weset bus vowtage histowy
in1_max			bus vowtage max awawm wimit (mV)
in1_min			bus vowtage min awawm wimit (mV)
in1_cwit_max		bus vowtage cwit max awawm wimit (mV)
in1_cwit_min		bus vowtage cwit min awawm wimit (mV)
in1_max_awawm		bus vowtage max awawm wimit exceeded
in1_min_awawm		bus vowtage min awawm wimit exceeded
in1_cwit_max_awawm	bus vowtage cwit max awawm wimit exceeded
in1_cwit_min_awawm	bus vowtage cwit min awawm wimit exceeded

powew1_input		powew measuwement (uW)
powew1_input_highest	powew histowicaw maximum weading (uW)
powew1_weset_histowy	weset powew histowy
powew1_max		powew max awawm wimit (uW)
powew1_cwit		powew cwit awawm wimit (uW)
powew1_max_awawm	powew max awawm wimit exceeded
powew1_cwit_awawm	powew cwit awawm wimit exceeded

cuww1_input		cuwwent measuwement (mA)

update_intewvaw		data convewsion time; affects numbew of sampwes used
			to avewage wesuwts fow shunt and bus vowtages.
======================= =======================================================

Genewaw Wemawks
---------------

The powew and cuwwent wegistews in this chip wequiwe that the cawibwation
wegistew is pwogwammed cowwectwy befowe they awe used. Nowmawwy this is expected
to be done in the BIOS. In the absence of BIOS pwogwamming, the shunt wesistow
vowtage can be pwovided using pwatfowm data. The dwivew uses pwatfowm data fwom
the ina2xx dwivew fow this puwpose. If cawibwation wegistew data is not pwovided
via pwatfowm data, the dwivew checks if the cawibwation wegistew has been
pwogwammed (ie has a vawue not equaw to zewo). If so, this vawue is wetained.
Othewwise, a defauwt vawue wefwecting a shunt wesistow vawue of 10 mOhm is
pwogwammed into the cawibwation wegistew.


Output Pins
-----------

Output pin pwogwamming is a boawd featuwe which depends on the BIOS. It is
outside the scope of a hawdwawe monitowing dwivew to enabwe ow disabwe output
pins.
