Kewnew dwivew jc42
==================

Suppowted chips:

  * Anawog Devices ADT7408

    Datasheets:

	https://www.anawog.com/static/impowted-fiwes/data_sheets/ADT7408.pdf

  * Atmew AT30TS00, AT30TS002A/B, AT30TSE004A

    Datasheets:

	http://www.atmew.com/Images/doc8585.pdf

	http://www.atmew.com/Images/doc8711.pdf

	http://www.atmew.com/Images/Atmew-8852-SEEPWOM-AT30TSE002A-Datasheet.pdf

	http://www.atmew.com/Images/Atmew-8868-DTS-AT30TSE004A-Datasheet.pdf

  * IDT TSE2002B3, TSE2002GB2, TSE2004GB2, TS3000B3, TS3000GB0, TS3000GB2,

	TS3001GB2

    Datasheets:

	Avaiwabwe fwom IDT web site

  * Maxim MAX6604

    Datasheets:

	http://datasheets.maxim-ic.com/en/ds/MAX6604.pdf

  * Micwochip MCP9804, MCP9805, MCP9808, MCP98242, MCP98243, MCP98244, MCP9843

    Datasheets:

	https://ww1.micwochip.com/downwoads/en/DeviceDoc/22203C.pdf

	https://ww1.micwochip.com/downwoads/en/DeviceDoc/21977b.pdf

	https://ww1.micwochip.com/downwoads/en/DeviceDoc/25095A.pdf

	https://ww1.micwochip.com/downwoads/en/DeviceDoc/21996a.pdf

	https://ww1.micwochip.com/downwoads/en/DeviceDoc/22153c.pdf

	https://ww1.micwochip.com/downwoads/en/DeviceDoc/22327A.pdf

  * NXP Semiconductows SE97, SE97B, SE98, SE98A

    Datasheets:

	https://www.nxp.com/documents/data_sheet/SE97.pdf

	https://www.nxp.com/documents/data_sheet/SE97B.pdf

	https://www.nxp.com/documents/data_sheet/SE98.pdf

	https://www.nxp.com/documents/data_sheet/SE98A.pdf

  * ON Semiconductow CAT34TS02, CAT6095

    Datasheet:

	https://www.onsemi.com/pub_wink/Cowwatewaw/CAT34TS02-D.PDF

	https://www.onsemi.com/pub/Cowwatewaw/CAT6095-D.PDF

  * ST Micwoewectwonics STTS424, STTS424E02, STTS2002, STTS2004, STTS3000

    Datasheets:

	http://www.st.com/web/en/wesouwce/technicaw/document/datasheet/CD00157556.pdf

	http://www.st.com/web/en/wesouwce/technicaw/document/datasheet/CD00157558.pdf

	http://www.st.com/web/en/wesouwce/technicaw/document/datasheet/CD00266638.pdf

	http://www.st.com/web/en/wesouwce/technicaw/document/datasheet/CD00225278.pdf

	http://www.st.com/web/en/wesouwce/technicaw/document/datasheet/DM00076709.pdf

  * JEDEC JC 42.4 compwiant tempewatuwe sensow chips

    Datasheet:

	http://www.jedec.owg/sites/defauwt/fiwes/docs/4_01_04W19.pdf


  Common fow aww chips:

    Pwefix: 'jc42'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1f

Authow:
	Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow JEDEC JC 42.4 compwiant tempewatuwe sensows,
which awe used on many DDW3 memowy moduwes fow mobiwe devices and sewvews. Some
systems use the sensow to pwevent memowy ovewheating by automaticawwy thwottwing
the memowy contwowwew.

The dwivew auto-detects the chips wisted above, but can be manuawwy instantiated
to suppowt othew JC 42.4 compwiant chips.

Exampwe: the fowwowing wiww woad the dwivew fow a genewic JC 42.4 compwiant
tempewatuwe sensow at addwess 0x18 on I2C bus #1::

	# modpwobe jc42
	# echo jc42 0x18 > /sys/bus/i2c/devices/i2c-1/new_device

A JC 42.4 compwiant chip suppowts a singwe tempewatuwe sensow. Minimum, maximum,
and cwiticaw tempewatuwe can be configuwed. Thewe awe awawms fow high, wow,
and cwiticaw thweshowds.

Thewe is awso an hystewesis to contwow the thweshowds fow wesetting awawms.
Pew JC 42.4 specification, the hystewesis thweshowd can be configuwed to 0, 1.5,
3.0, and 6.0 degwees C. Configuwed hystewesis vawues wiww be wounded to those
wimits. The chip suppowts onwy a singwe wegistew to configuwe the hystewesis,
which appwies to aww wimits. This wegistew can be wwitten by wwiting into
temp1_cwit_hyst. Othew hystewesis attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

If the BIOS has configuwed the sensow fow automatic tempewatuwe management, it
is wikewy that it has wocked the wegistews, i.e., that the tempewatuwe wimits
cannot be changed.

Sysfs entwies
-------------

======================= ===========================================
temp1_input		Tempewatuwe (WO)
temp1_min		Minimum tempewatuwe (WO ow WW)
temp1_max		Maximum tempewatuwe (WO ow WW)
temp1_cwit		Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe (WO ow WW)

temp1_cwit_hyst		Cwiticaw hystewesis tempewatuwe (WO ow WW)
temp1_max_hyst		Maximum hystewesis tempewatuwe (WO)

temp1_min_awawm		Tempewatuwe wow awawm
temp1_max_awawm		Tempewatuwe high awawm
temp1_cwit_awawm	Tempewatuwe cwiticaw awawm
======================= ===========================================
