Kewnew dwivew wm25066
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * TI WM25056

    Pwefix: 'wm25056'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheets:

	https://www.ti.com/wit/gpn/wm25056

	https://www.ti.com/wit/gpn/wm25056a

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM25066

    Pwefix: 'wm25066'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheets:

	http://www.nationaw.com/pf/WM/WM25066.htmw

	http://www.nationaw.com/pf/WM/WM25066A.htmw

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM5064

    Pwefix: 'wm5064'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

	http://www.nationaw.com/pf/WM/WM5064.htmw

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM5066

    Pwefix: 'wm5066'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

	http://www.nationaw.com/pf/WM/WM5066.htmw

  * Texas Instwuments WM5066I

    Pwefix: 'wm5066i'

    Addwesses scanned: -

	Datasheet:

    https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/WM5066I


Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew suppowts hawdwawe monitowing fow Nationaw Semiconductow / TI WM25056,
WM25066, WM5064, and WM5066/WM5066I Powew Management, Monitowing,
Contwow, and Pwotection ICs.

The dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.

The shunt (sense) wesistow vawue can be configuwed by a device twee pwopewty;
see Documentation/devicetwee/bindings/hwmon/pmbus/ti,wm25066.yamw fow detaiws.

Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted. Wimits awe wead-wwite; aww othew
attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

======================= =======================================================
in1_wabew		"vin"
in1_input		Measuwed input vowtage.
in1_avewage		Avewage measuwed input vowtage.
in1_min			Minimum input vowtage.
in1_max			Maximum input vowtage.
in1_min_awawm		Input vowtage wow awawm.
in1_max_awawm		Input vowtage high awawm.

in2_wabew		"vmon"
in2_input		Measuwed vowtage on VAUX pin
in2_min			Minimum VAUX vowtage (WM25056 onwy).
in2_max			Maximum VAUX vowtage (WM25056 onwy).
in2_min_awawm		VAUX vowtage wow awawm (WM25056 onwy).
in2_max_awawm		VAUX vowtage high awawm (WM25056 onwy).

in3_wabew		"vout1"
			Not suppowted on WM25056.
in3_input		Measuwed output vowtage.
in3_avewage		Avewage measuwed output vowtage.
in3_min			Minimum output vowtage.
in3_min_awawm		Output vowtage wow awawm.

cuww1_wabew		"iin"
cuww1_input		Measuwed input cuwwent.
cuww1_avewage		Avewage measuwed input cuwwent.
cuww1_max		Maximum input cuwwent.
cuww1_max_awawm		Input cuwwent high awawm.

powew1_wabew		"pin"
powew1_input		Measuwed input powew.
powew1_avewage		Avewage measuwed input powew.
powew1_max		Maximum input powew wimit.
powew1_awawm		Input powew awawm
powew1_input_highest	Histowicaw maximum powew.
powew1_weset_histowy	Wwite any vawue to weset maximum powew histowy.

temp1_input		Measuwed tempewatuwe.
temp1_max		Maximum tempewatuwe.
temp1_cwit		Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe.
temp1_max_awawm		Chip tempewatuwe high awawm.
temp1_cwit_awawm	Chip tempewatuwe cwiticaw high awawm.
======================= =======================================================
