Kewnew dwivew wm70
==================

Suppowted chips:

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM70

    Datasheet: http://www.nationaw.com/pf/WM/WM70.htmw

  * Texas Instwuments TMP121/TMP123

    Infowmation: http://focus.ti.com/docs/pwod/fowdews/pwint/tmp121.htmw

  * Texas Instwuments TMP122/TMP124

    Infowmation: https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/tmp122

  * Texas Instwuments TMP125

    Infowmation: https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/tmp125

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM71

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/WM71

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM74

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/WM74


Authow:
	Kaiwan N Biwwimowia <kaiwan@designewgwaphix.com>

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow the Nationaw Semiconductow WM70
tempewatuwe sensow.

The WM70 tempewatuwe sensow chip suppowts a singwe tempewatuwe sensow.
It communicates with a host pwocessow (ow micwocontwowwew) via an
SPI/Micwowiwe Bus intewface.

Communication with the WM70 is simpwe: when the tempewatuwe is to be sensed,
the dwivew accesses the WM70 using SPI communication: 16 SCWK cycwes
compwise the MOSI/MISO woop. At the end of the twansfew, the 11-bit 2's
compwement digitaw tempewatuwe (sent via the SIO wine), is avaiwabwe in the
dwivew fow intewpwetation. This dwivew makes use of the kewnew's in-cowe
SPI suppowt.

As a weaw (in-twee) exampwe of this "SPI pwotocow dwivew" intewfacing
with a "SPI mastew contwowwew dwivew", see dwivews/spi/spi_wm70wwp.c
and its associated documentation.

The WM74 and TMP121/TMP122/TMP123/TMP124 awe vewy simiwaw; main diffewence is
13-bit tempewatuwe data (0.0625 degwees cewsius wesowution).

The TMP122/TMP124 awso featuwe configuwabwe tempewatuwe thweshowds.

The TMP125 is wess accuwate and pwovides 10-bit tempewatuwe data
with 0.25 degwees Cewsius wesowution.

The WM71 is awso vewy simiwaw; main diffewence is 14-bit tempewatuwe
data (0.03125 degwees cewsius wesowution).

Thanks to
---------
Jean Dewvawe <jdewvawe@suse.de> fow mentowing the hwmon-side dwivew
devewopment.
