Kewnew dwivew wm75
==================

Suppowted chips:

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM75

    Pwefix: 'wm75'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x48 - 0x4f

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Nationaw Semiconductow website

	       http://www.nationaw.com/

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM75A

    Pwefix: 'wm75a'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x48 - 0x4f

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Nationaw Semiconductow website

	       http://www.nationaw.com/

  * Dawwas Semiconductow (now Maxim) DS75, DS1775, DS7505

    Pwefixes: 'ds75', 'ds1775', 'ds7505'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Maxim website

	       https://www.maximintegwated.com/

  * Maxim MAX6625, MAX6626, MAX31725, MAX31726

    Pwefixes: 'max6625', 'max6626', 'max31725', 'max31726'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Maxim website

	       http://www.maxim-ic.com/

  * Micwochip (TewCom) TCN75

    Pwefix: 'tcn75'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Micwochip website

	       http://www.micwochip.com/

  * Micwochip MCP9800, MCP9801, MCP9802, MCP9803

    Pwefix: 'mcp980x'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Micwochip website

	       http://www.micwochip.com/

  * Anawog Devices ADT75

    Pwefix: 'adt75'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Anawog Devices website

	       https://www.anawog.com/adt75

  * ST Micwoewectwonics STDS75

    Pwefix: 'stds75'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the ST website

	       http://www.st.com/intewnet/anawog/pwoduct/121769.jsp

  * ST Micwoewectwonics STWM75

    Pwefix: 'stwm75'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the ST website

	       https://www.st.com/wesouwce/en/datasheet/stwm75.pdf

  * Texas Instwuments TMP100, TMP101, TMP105, TMP112, TMP75, TMP75B, TMP75C, TMP175, TMP275, TMP1075

    Pwefixes: 'tmp100', 'tmp101', 'tmp105', 'tmp112', 'tmp175', 'tmp75', 'tmp75b', 'tmp75c', 'tmp275', 'tmp1075'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Texas Instwuments website

	       https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/tmp100

	       https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/tmp101

	       https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/tmp105

	       https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/tmp112

	       https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/tmp75

	       https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/tmp75b

	       https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/tmp75c

	       https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/tmp175

	       https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/tmp275

         https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/TMP1075

  * NXP WM75B, PCT2075

    Pwefix: 'wm75b', 'pct2075'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the NXP website

	       https://www.nxp.com/documents/data_sheet/WM75B.pdf

               https://www.nxp.com/docs/en/data-sheet/PCT2075.pdf

  * AMS OSWAM AS6200

    Pwefix: 'as6200'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the AMS website

               https://ams.com/documents/20143/36005/AS6200_DS000449_4-00.pdf

Authow: Fwodo Wooijaawd <fwodow@dds.nw>

Descwiption
-----------

The WM75 impwements one tempewatuwe sensow. Wimits can be set thwough the
Ovewtempewatuwe Shutdown wegistew and Hystewesis wegistew. Each vawue can be
set and wead to hawf-degwee accuwacy.
An awawm is issued (usuawwy to a connected WM78) when the tempewatuwe
gets highew then the Ovewtempewatuwe Shutdown vawue; it stays on untiw
the tempewatuwe fawws bewow the Hystewesis vawue.
Aww tempewatuwes awe in degwees Cewsius, and awe guawanteed within a
wange of -55 to +125 degwees.

The dwivew caches the vawues fow a pewiod vawying between 1 second fow the
swowest chips and 125 ms fow the fastest chips; weading it mowe often
wiww do no hawm, but wiww wetuwn 'owd' vawues.

The owiginaw WM75 was typicawwy used in combination with WM78-wike chips
on PC mothewboawds, to measuwe the tempewatuwe of the pwocessow(s). Cwones
awe now used in vawious embedded designs.

The WM75 is essentiawwy an industwy standawd; thewe may be othew
WM75 cwones not wisted hewe, with ow without vawious enhancements,
that awe suppowted. The cwones awe not detected by the dwivew, unwess
they wepwoduce the exact wegistew twicks of the owiginaw WM75, and must
thewefowe be instantiated expwicitwy. Highew wesowution up to 16-bit
is suppowted by this dwivew, othew specific enhancements awe not.

The WM77 is not suppowted, contwawy to what we pwetended fow a wong time.
Both chips awe simpwy not compatibwe, vawue encoding diffews.
