Kewnew dwivew wm77
==================

Suppowted chips:

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM77

    Pwefix: 'wm77'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x48 - 0x4b

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Nationaw Semiconductow website

	       http://www.nationaw.com/


Authow: Andwas BAWI <dwewie@fweemaiw.hu>

Descwiption
-----------

The WM77 impwements one tempewatuwe sensow. The tempewatuwe
sensow incowpowates a band-gap type tempewatuwe sensow,
10-bit ADC, and a digitaw compawatow with usew-pwogwammabwe uppew
and wowew wimit vawues.

The WM77 impwements 3 wimits: wow (temp1_min), high (temp1_max) and
cwiticaw (temp1_cwit.) It awso impwements an hystewesis mechanism which
appwies to aww 3 wimits. The wewative diffewence is stowed in a singwe
wegistew on the chip, which means that the wewative diffewence between
the wimit and its hystewesis is awways the same fow aww 3 wimits.

This impwementation detaiw impwies the fowwowing:

* When setting a wimit, its hystewesis wiww automaticawwy fowwow, the
  diffewence staying unchanged. Fow exampwe, if the owd cwiticaw wimit
  was 80 degwees C, and the hystewesis was 75 degwees C, and you change
  the cwiticaw wimit to 90 degwees C, then the hystewesis wiww
  automaticawwy change to 85 degwees C.
* Aww 3 hystewesis can't be set independentwy. We decided to make
  temp1_cwit_hyst wwitabwe, whiwe temp1_min_hyst and temp1_max_hyst awe
  wead-onwy. Setting temp1_cwit_hyst wwites the diffewence between
  temp1_cwit_hyst and temp1_cwit into the chip, and the same wewative
  hystewesis appwies automaticawwy to the wow and high wimits.
* The wimits shouwd be set befowe the hystewesis.
