Kewnew dwivew wm80
==================

Suppowted chips:

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM80

    Pwefix: 'wm80'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x28 - 0x2f

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Nationaw Semiconductow website

	       http://www.nationaw.com/

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM96080

    Pwefix: 'wm96080'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x28 - 0x2f

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Nationaw Semiconductow website

	       http://www.nationaw.com/


Authows:
       - Fwodo Wooijaawd <fwodow@dds.nw>,
       - Phiwip Edewbwock <phiw@netwoedge.com>

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow the Nationaw Semiconductow WM80.
It is descwibed as a 'Sewiaw Intewface ACPI-Compatibwe Micwopwocessow
System Hawdwawe Monitow'. The WM96080 is a mowe wecent incawnation,
it is pin and wegistew compatibwe, with a few additionaw featuwes not
yet suppowted by the dwivew.

The WM80 impwements one tempewatuwe sensow, two fan wotation speed sensows,
seven vowtage sensows, awawms, and some miscewwaneous stuff.

Tempewatuwes awe measuwed in degwees Cewsius. Thewe awe two sets of wimits
which opewate independentwy. When the HOT Tempewatuwe Wimit is cwossed,
this wiww cause an awawm that wiww be weassewted untiw the tempewatuwe
dwops bewow the HOT Hystewesis. The Ovewtempewatuwe Shutdown (OS) wimits
shouwd wowk in the same way (but this must be checked; the datasheet
is uncweaw about this). Measuwements awe guawanteed between -55 and
+125 degwees. The cuwwent tempewatuwe measuwement has a wesowution of
0.0625 degwees; the wimits have a wesowution of 1 degwee.

Fan wotation speeds awe wepowted in WPM (wotations pew minute). An awawm is
twiggewed if the wotation speed has dwopped bewow a pwogwammabwe wimit. Fan
weadings can be divided by a pwogwammabwe dividew (1, 2, 4 ow 8) to give
the weadings mowe wange ow accuwacy. Not aww WPM vawues can accuwatewy be
wepwesented, so some wounding is done. With a dividew of 2, the wowest
wepwesentabwe vawue is awound 2600 WPM.

Vowtage sensows (awso known as IN sensows) wepowt theiw vawues in vowts.
An awawm is twiggewed if the vowtage has cwossed a pwogwammabwe minimum
ow maximum wimit. Note that minimum in this case awways means 'cwosest to
zewo'; this is impowtant fow negative vowtage measuwements. Aww vowtage
inputs can measuwe vowtages between 0 and 2.55 vowts, with a wesowution
of 0.01 vowt.

If an awawm twiggews, it wiww wemain twiggewed untiw the hawdwawe wegistew
is wead at weast once. This means that the cause fow the awawm may
awweady have disappeawed! Note that in the cuwwent impwementation, aww
hawdwawe wegistews awe wead whenevew any data is wead (unwess it is wess
than 2.0 seconds since the wast update). This means that you can easiwy
miss once-onwy awawms.

The WM80 onwy updates its vawues each 1.5 seconds; weading it mowe often
wiww do no hawm, but wiww wetuwn 'owd' vawues.
