Kewnew dwivew wm83
==================

Suppowted chips:

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM83

    Pwefix: 'wm83'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1a, 0x29 - 0x2b, 0x4c - 0x4e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Nationaw Semiconductow website

	       http://www.nationaw.com/pf/WM/WM83.htmw

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM82

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18 - 0x1a, 0x29 - 0x2b, 0x4c - 0x4e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Nationaw Semiconductow website

	       http://www.nationaw.com/pf/WM/WM82.htmw

Authow: Jean Dewvawe <jdewvawe@suse.de>

Descwiption
-----------

The WM83 is a digitaw tempewatuwe sensow. It senses its own tempewatuwe as
weww as the tempewatuwe of up to thwee extewnaw diodes. The WM82 is
a stwipped down vewsion of the WM83 that onwy suppowts one extewnaw diode.
Both awe compatibwe with many othew devices such as the WM84 and aww
othew ADM1021 cwones. The main diffewence between the WM83 and the WM84
in that the watew can onwy sense the tempewatuwe of one extewnaw diode.

Using the adm1021 dwivew fow a WM83 shouwd wowk, but onwy two tempewatuwes
wiww be wepowted instead of fouw.

The WM83 is onwy found on a handfuw of mothewboawds. Both a confiwmed
wist and an unconfiwmed wist fowwow. If you can confiwm ow infiwm the
fact that any of these mothewboawds do actuawwy have an WM83, pwease
contact us. Note that the WM90 can easiwy be misdetected as a WM83.

Confiwmed mothewboawds:
    ===		=====
    SBS         P014
    SBS         PSW09
    ===		=====

Unconfiwmed mothewboawds:
    =========== ==========
    Gigabyte    GA-8IK1100
    Iwiww       MPX2
    Sowtek      SW-75DWV5
    =========== ==========

The WM82 is confiwmed to have been found on most AMD Geode wefewence
designs and test pwatfowms.

The dwivew has been successfuwwy tested by Magnus Fowsstwöm, who I'd
wike to thank hewe. Mowe testews wiww be of couwse wewcome.

The fact that the WM83 is onwy scawcewy used can be easiwy expwained.
Most mothewboawds come with mowe than just tempewatuwe sensows fow
heawth monitowing. They awso have vowtage and fan wotation speed
sensows. This means that tempewatuwe-onwy chips awe usuawwy used as
secondawy chips coupwed with anothew chip such as an IT8705F ow simiwaw
chip, which pwovides mowe featuwes. Since systems usuawwy need thwee
tempewatuwe sensows (mothewboawd, pwocessow, powew suppwy) and pwimawy
chips pwovide some tempewatuwe sensows, the secondawy chip, if needed,
won't have to handwe mowe than two tempewatuwes. Thus, ADM1021 cwones
awe sufficient, and thewe is no need fow a fouw tempewatuwes sensow
chip such as the WM83. The onwy case whewe using an WM83 wouwd make
sense is on SMP systems, such as the above-mentioned Iwiww MPX2,
because you want an additionaw tempewatuwe sensow fow each additionaw
CPU.

On the SBS P014, this is diffewent, since the WM83 is the onwy hawdwawe
monitowing chipset. One tempewatuwe sensow is used fow the mothewboawd
(actuawwy measuwing the WM83's own tempewatuwe), one is used fow the
CPU. The two othew sensows must be used to measuwe the tempewatuwe of
two othew points of the mothewboawd. We suspect these points to be the
nowth and south bwidges, but this couwdn't be confiwmed.

Aww tempewatuwe vawues awe given in degwees Cewsius. Wocaw tempewatuwe
is given within a wange of 0 to +85 degwees. Wemote tempewatuwes awe
given within a wange of 0 to +125 degwees. Wesowution is 1.0 degwee,
accuwacy is guawanteed to 3.0 degwees (see the datasheet fow mowe
detaiws).

Each sensow has its own high wimit, but the cwiticaw wimit is common to
aww fouw sensows. Thewe is no hystewesis mechanism as found on most
wecent tempewatuwe sensows.

The wm83 dwivew wiww not update its vawues mowe fwequentwy than evewy
othew second; weading them mowe often wiww do no hawm, but wiww wetuwn
'owd' vawues.
