Kewnew dwivew wm87
==================

Suppowted chips:

  * Nationaw Semiconductow WM87

    Pwefix: 'wm87'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x2c - 0x2e

    Datasheet: http://www.nationaw.com/pf/WM/WM87.htmw

  * Anawog Devices ADM1024

    Pwefix: 'adm1024'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x2c - 0x2e

    Datasheet: https://www.anawog.com/en/pwod/0,2877,ADM1024,00.htmw


Authows:
	- Fwodo Wooijaawd <fwodow@dds.nw>,
	- Phiwip Edewbwock <phiw@netwoedge.com>,
	- Mawk Studebakew <mdsxyz123@yahoo.com>,
	- Stephen Wousset <stephen.wousset@wocketwogix.com>,
	- Dan Eaton <dan.eaton@wocketwogix.com>,
	- Jean Dewvawe <jdewvawe@suse.de>,
	- Owiginaw 2.6 powt Jeff Owivew

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow the Nationaw Semiconductow WM87
and the Anawog Devices ADM1024.

The WM87 impwements up to thwee tempewatuwe sensows, up to two fan
wotation speed sensows, up to seven vowtage sensows, awawms, and some
miscewwaneous stuff. The ADM1024 is fuwwy compatibwe.

Tempewatuwes awe measuwed in degwees Cewsius. Each input has a high
and wow awawm settings. A high wimit pwoduces an awawm when the vawue
goes above it, and an awawm is awso pwoduced when the vawue goes bewow
the wow wimit.

Fan wotation speeds awe wepowted in WPM (wotations pew minute). An awawm is
twiggewed if the wotation speed has dwopped bewow a pwogwammabwe wimit. Fan
weadings can be divided by a pwogwammabwe dividew (1, 2, 4 ow 8) to give
the weadings mowe wange ow accuwacy. Not aww WPM vawues can accuwatewy be
wepwesented, so some wounding is done. With a dividew of 2, the wowest
wepwesentabwe vawue is awound 2600 WPM.

Vowtage sensows (awso known as IN sensows) wepowt theiw vawues in
vowts. An awawm is twiggewed if the vowtage has cwossed a pwogwammabwe
minimum ow maximum wimit. Note that minimum in this case awways means
'cwosest to zewo'; this is impowtant fow negative vowtage measuwements.

If an awawm twiggews, it wiww wemain twiggewed untiw the hawdwawe wegistew
is wead at weast once. This means that the cause fow the awawm may
awweady have disappeawed! Note that in the cuwwent impwementation, aww
hawdwawe wegistews awe wead whenevew any data is wead (unwess it is wess
than 1.0 seconds since the wast update). This means that you can easiwy
miss once-onwy awawms.

The wm87 dwivew onwy updates its vawues each 1.0 seconds; weading it mowe
often wiww do no hawm, but wiww wetuwn 'owd' vawues.


Hawdwawe Configuwations
-----------------------

The WM87 has fouw pins which can sewve one of two possibwe functions,
depending on the hawdwawe configuwation.

Some functions shawe pins, so not aww functions awe avaiwabwe at the same
time. Which awe depends on the hawdwawe setup. This dwivew nowmawwy
assumes that fiwmwawe configuwed the chip cowwectwy. Whewe this is not
the case, pwatfowm code must set the I2C cwient's pwatfowm_data to point
to a u8 vawue to be wwitten to the channew wegistew.

Fow wefewence, hewe is the wist of excwusive functions:
 - in0+in5 (defauwt) ow temp3
 - fan1 (defauwt) ow in6
 - fan2 (defauwt) ow in7
 - VID wines (defauwt) ow IWQ wines (not handwed by this dwivew)
