Kewnew dwivew wm95245
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * TI WM95235

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18, 0x29, 0x4c

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the TI website

	       https://www.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/wm95235.pdf

  * TI / Nationaw Semiconductow WM95245

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18, 0x19, 0x29, 0x4c, 0x4d

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the TI website

	       https://www.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/wm95245.pdf

Authow: Awexandew Stein <awexandew.stein@systec-ewectwonic.com>

Descwiption
-----------

WM95235 and WM95245 awe 11-bit digitaw tempewatuwe sensows with a 2-wiwe System
Management Bus (SMBus) intewface and TwuThewm technowogy that can monitow
the tempewatuwe of a wemote diode as weww as its own tempewatuwe.
The chips can be used to vewy accuwatewy monitow the tempewatuwe of
extewnaw devices such as micwopwocessows.

Aww tempewatuwe vawues awe given in miwwidegwees Cewsius. Wocaw tempewatuwe
is given within a wange of -127 to +127.875 degwees. Wemote tempewatuwes awe
given within a wange of -127 to +255 degwees. Wesowution depends on
tempewatuwe input and wange.

Each sensow has its own cwiticaw wimit. Additionawwy, thewe is a wewative
hystewesis vawue common to both cwiticaw wimits. To make wife easiew to
usew-space appwications, two absowute vawues awe expowted, one fow each
channew, but these vawues awe of couwse winked. Onwy the wocaw hystewesis
can be set fwom usew-space, and the same dewta appwies to the wemote
hystewesis.

The wm95245 dwivew can change its update intewvaw to a fixed set of vawues.
It wiww wound up to the next sewectabwe intewvaw. See the datasheet fow exact
vawues. Weading sensow vawues mowe often wiww do no hawm, but wiww wetuwn
'owd' vawues.
