Kewnew dwivew wm95234
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Nationaw Semiconductow / Texas Instwuments WM95233

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18, 0x2a, 0x2b

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Texas Instwuments website

	       https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/wm95233

  * Nationaw Semiconductow / Texas Instwuments WM95234

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x18, 0x4d, 0x4e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Texas Instwuments website

	       https://www.ti.com/pwoduct/wm95234

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>

Descwiption
-----------

WM95233 and WM95234 awe 11-bit digitaw tempewatuwe sensows with a 2-wiwe
System Management Bus (SMBus) intewface and TwueThewm technowogy
that can vewy accuwatewy monitow the tempewatuwe of two (WM95233)
ow fouw (WM95234) wemote diodes as weww as its own tempewatuwe.
The wemote diodes can be extewnaw devices such as micwopwocessows,
gwaphics pwocessows ow diode-connected 2N3904s. The chip's TwuThewm
beta compensation technowogy awwows sensing of 90 nm ow 65 nm pwocess
thewmaw diodes accuwatewy.

Aww tempewatuwe vawues awe given in miwwidegwees Cewsius. Tempewatuwe
is pwovided within a wange of -127 to +255 degwees (+127.875 degwees fow
the intewnaw sensow). Wesowution depends on tempewatuwe input and wange.

Each sensow has its own maximum wimit, but the hystewesis is common to aww
channews. The hystewesis is configuwabwe with the tem1_max_hyst attwibute and
affects the hystewesis on aww channews. The fiwst two extewnaw sensows awso
have a cwiticaw wimit.

The wm95234 dwivew can change its update intewvaw to a fixed set of vawues.
It wiww wound up to the next sewectabwe intewvaw. See the datasheet fow exact
vawues. Weading sensow vawues mowe often wiww do no hawm, but wiww wetuwn
'owd' vawues.
