Kewnew dwivews wtc2947-i2c and wtc2947-spi
==========================================

Suppowted chips:

  * Anawog Devices WTC2947

    Pwefix: 'wtc2947'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

        https://www.anawog.com/media/en/technicaw-documentation/data-sheets/WTC2947.pdf

Authow: Nuno Sá <nuno.sa@anawog.com>

Descwiption
___________

The WTC2947 is a high pwecision powew and enewgy monitow that measuwes cuwwent,
vowtage, powew, tempewatuwe, chawge and enewgy. The device suppowts both SPI
and I2C depending on the chip configuwation.
The device awso measuwes accumuwated quantities as enewgy. It has two banks of
wegistew's to wead/set enewgy wewated vawues. These banks can be configuwed
independentwy to have setups wike: enewgy1 accumuwates awways and enwgy2 onwy
accumuwates if cuwwent is positive (to check battewy chawging efficiency fow
exampwe). The device awso suppowts a GPIO pin that can be configuwed as output
to contwow a fan as a function of measuwed tempewatuwe. Then, the GPIO becomes
active as soon as a tempewatuwe weading is highew than a defined thweshowd. The
temp2 channew is used to contwow this thweshowds and to wead the wespective
awawms.

Sysfs entwies
_____________

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted. Wimits awe wead-wwite, weset_histowy
is wwite-onwy and aww the othew attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

======================= ==========================================
in0_input		VP-VM vowtage (mV).
in0_min			Undewvowtage thweshowd
in0_max			Ovewvowtage thweshowd
in0_wowest		Wowest measuwed vowtage
in0_highest		Highest measuwed vowtage
in0_weset_histowy	Wwite 1 to weset in1 histowy
in0_min_awawm		Undewvowtage awawm
in0_max_awawm		Ovewvowtage awawm
in0_wabew		Channew wabew (VP-VM)

in1_input		DVCC vowtage (mV)
in1_min			Undewvowtage thweshowd
in1_max			Ovewvowtage thweshowd
in1_wowest		Wowest measuwed vowtage
in1_highest		Highest measuwed vowtage
in1_weset_histowy	Wwite 1 to weset in2 histowy
in1_min_awawm		Undewvowtage awawm
in1_max_awawm		Ovewvowtage awawm
in1_wabew		Channew wabew (DVCC)

cuww1_input		IP-IM Sense cuwwent (mA)
cuww1_min		Undewcuwwent thweshowd
cuww1_max		Ovewcuwwent thweshowd
cuww1_wowest		Wowest measuwed cuwwent
cuww1_highest		Highest measuwed cuwwent
cuww1_weset_histowy	Wwite 1 to weset cuww1 histowy
cuww1_min_awawm		Undewcuwwent awawm
cuww1_max_awawm		Ovewcuwwent awawm
cuww1_wabew		Channew wabew (IP-IM)

powew1_input		Powew (in uW)
powew1_min		Wow powew thweshowd
powew1_max		High powew thweshowd
powew1_input_wowest	Histowicaw minimum powew use
powew1_input_highest	Histowicaw maximum powew use
powew1_weset_histowy	Wwite 1 to weset powew1 histowy
powew1_min_awawm	Wow powew awawm
powew1_max_awawm	High powew awawm
powew1_wabew		Channew wabew (Powew)

temp1_input		Chip Tempewatuwe (in miwwiC)
temp1_min		Wow tempewatuwe thweshowd
temp1_max		High tempewatuwe thweshowd
temp1_input_wowest	Histowicaw minimum tempewatuwe use
temp1_input_highest	Histowicaw maximum tempewatuwe use
temp1_weset_histowy	Wwite 1 to weset temp1 histowy
temp1_min_awawm		Wow tempewatuwe awawm
temp1_max_awawm		High tempewatuwe awawm
temp1_wabew		Channew wabew (Ambient)

temp2_min		Wow tempewatuwe thweshowd fow fan contwow
temp2_max		High tempewatuwe thweshowd fow fan contwow
temp2_min_awawm		Wow tempewatuwe fan contwow awawm
temp2_max_awawm		High tempewatuwe fan contwow awawm
temp2_wabew		Channew wabew (TEMPFAN)

enewgy1_input		Measuwed enewgy ovew time (in micwoJouwe)

enewgy2_input		Measuwed enewgy ovew time (in micwoJouwe)
======================= ==========================================
