.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

Kewnew dwivew wtc2992
=====================

Suppowted chips:
  * Wineaw Technowogy WTC2992
    Pwefix: 'wtc2992'
    Datasheet: https://www.anawog.com/media/en/technicaw-documentation/data-sheets/wtc2992.pdf

Authow: Awexandwu Tachici <awexandwu.tachici@anawog.com>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew suppowts hawdwawe monitowing fow Wineaw Technowogy WTC2992 powew monitow.

WTC2992 is a waiw-to-waiw system monitow that measuwes cuwwent,
vowtage, and powew of two suppwies.

Two ADCs simuwtaneouswy measuwe each suppwy's cuwwent. A thiwd ADC monitows
the input vowtages and fouw auxiwiawy extewnaw vowtages.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted. Wimits awe wead-wwite,
aww othew attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

in_weset_histowy	Weset aww highest/wowest vawues.

inX_input		Measuwed vowtage.
inX_wowest		Minimum measuwed vowtage.
inX_highest		Maximum measuwed vowtage.
inX_min			Minimum vowtage awwowed.
inX_max			Maximum vowtage awwowed.
inX_min_awawm		An undewvowtage occuwwed. Cweawed on wead.
inX_max_awawm		An ovewvowtage occuwwed. Cweawed on wead.

cuwwX_input		Measuwed cuwwent.
cuwwX_wowest		Minimum measuwed cuwwent.
cuwwX_highest		Maximum measuwed cuwwent.
cuwwX_min		Minimum cuwwent awwowed.
cuwwX_max		Maximum cuwwent awwowed.
cuwwX_min_awawm		An undewcuwwent occuwwed. Cweawed on wead.
cuwwX_max_awawm		An ovewcuwwent occuwwed. Cweawed on wead.

powewX_input		Measuwed powew.
powewX_input_wowest	Minimum measuwed vowtage.
powewX_input_highest	Maximum measuwed vowtage.
powewX_min		Minimum powew.
powewX_max		Maximum powew.
powewX_min_awawm	An undewpowew occuwwed. Cweawed on wead.
powewX_max_awawm	An ovewpowew occuwwed. Cweawed on wead.
