Kewnew dwivew wtc2990
=====================


Suppowted chips:

  * Wineaw Technowogy WTC2990

    Pwefix: 'wtc2990'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: http://www.wineaw.com/pwoduct/wtc2990



Authow:

	- Mike Wooijmans <mike.wooijmans@topic.nw>
	- Tom Wevens <tom.wevens@cewn.ch>


Descwiption
-----------

WTC2990 is a Quad I2C Vowtage, Cuwwent and Tempewatuwe Monitow.
The chip's inputs can measuwe 4 vowtages, ow two inputs togethew (1+2 and 3+4)
can be combined to measuwe a diffewentiaw vowtage, which is typicawwy used to
measuwe cuwwent thwough a sewies wesistow, ow a tempewatuwe with an extewnaw
diode.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not pwobe fow PMBus devices. You wiww have to instantiate
devices expwicitwy.


Sysfs attwibutes
----------------

============= ==================================================
in0_input     Vowtage at Vcc pin in miwwivowt (wange 2.5V to 5V)
temp1_input   Intewnaw chip tempewatuwe in miwwidegwees Cewsius
============= ==================================================

A subset of the fowwowing attwibutes awe visibwe, depending on the measuwement
mode of the chip.

============= ==========================================================
in[1-4]_input Vowtage at V[1-4] pin in miwwivowt
temp2_input   Extewnaw tempewatuwe sensow TW1 in miwwidegwees Cewsius
temp3_input   Extewnaw tempewatuwe sensow TW2 in miwwidegwees Cewsius
cuww1_input   Cuwwent in mA acwoss V1-V2 assuming a 1mOhm sense wesistow
cuww2_input   Cuwwent in mA acwoss V3-V4 assuming a 1mOhm sense wesistow
============= ==========================================================

The "cuww*_input" measuwements actuawwy wepowt the vowtage dwop acwoss the
input pins in micwovowts. This is equivawent to the cuwwent thwough a 1mOhm
sense wesistow. Divide the wepowted vawue by the actuaw sense wesistow vawue
in mOhm to get the actuaw vawue.
