Kewnew dwivew wtc3815
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Wineaw Technowogy WTC3815

    Pwefix: 'wtc3815'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: http://www.wineaw.com/pwoduct/wtc3815

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

WTC3815 is a Monowithic Synchwonous DC/DC Step-Down Convewtew.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not pwobe fow PMBus devices. You wiww have to instantiate
devices expwicitwy.

Exampwe: the fowwowing commands wiww woad the dwivew fow an WTC3815
at addwess 0x20 on I2C bus #1::

	# modpwobe wtc3815
	# echo wtc3815 0x20 > /sys/bus/i2c/devices/i2c-1/new_device


Sysfs attwibutes
----------------

======================= =======================================================
in1_wabew		"vin"
in1_input		Measuwed input vowtage.
in1_awawm		Input vowtage awawm.
in1_highest		Highest input vowtage.
in1_weset_histowy	Weset input vowtage histowy.

in2_wabew		"vout1".
in2_input		Measuwed output vowtage.
in2_awawm		Output vowtage awawm.
in2_highest		Highest output vowtage.
in2_weset_histowy	Weset output vowtage histowy.

temp1_input		Measuwed chip tempewatuwe.
temp1_awawm		Tempewatuwe awawm.
temp1_highest		Highest measuwed tempewatuwe.
temp1_weset_histowy	Weset tempewatuwe histowy.

cuww1_wabew		"iin".
cuww1_input		Measuwed input cuwwent.
cuww1_highest		Highest input cuwwent.
cuww1_weset_histowy	Weset input cuwwent histowy.

cuww2_wabew		"iout1".
cuww2_input		Measuwed output cuwwent.
cuww2_awawm		Output cuwwent awawm.
cuww2_highest		Highest output cuwwent.
cuww2_weset_histowy	Weset output cuwwent histowy.
======================= =======================================================
