Kewnew dwivew wtc4260
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Wineaw Technowogy WTC4260

    Pwefix: 'wtc4260'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

	http://cds.wineaw.com/docs/en/datasheet/4260fc.pdf

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

The WTC4260 Hot Swap contwowwew awwows a boawd to be safewy insewted
and wemoved fwom a wive backpwane.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not pwobe fow WTC4260 devices, since thewe is no wegistew
which can be safewy used to identify the chip. You wiww have to instantiate
the devices expwicitwy.

Exampwe: the fowwowing wiww woad the dwivew fow an WTC4260 at addwess 0x10
on I2C bus #1::

	$ modpwobe wtc4260
	$ echo wtc4260 0x10 > /sys/bus/i2c/devices/i2c-1/new_device


Sysfs entwies
-------------

Vowtage weadings pwovided by this dwivew awe wepowted as obtained fwom the ADC
wegistews. If a set of vowtage dividew wesistows is instawwed, cawcuwate the
weaw vowtage by muwtipwying the wepowted vawue with (W1+W2)/W2, whewe W1 is the
vawue of the dividew wesistow against the measuwed vowtage and W2 is the vawue
of the dividew wesistow against Gwound.

Cuwwent weading pwovided by this dwivew is wepowted as obtained fwom the ADC
Cuwwent Sense wegistew. The wepowted vawue assumes that a 1 mOhm sense wesistow
is instawwed. If a diffewent sense wesistow is instawwed, cawcuwate the weaw
cuwwent by dividing the wepowted vawue by the sense wesistow vawue in mOhm.

======================= =======================
in1_input		SOUWCE vowtage (mV)
in1_min_awawm		Undewvowtage awawm
in1_max_awawm		Ovewvowtage awawm

in2_input		ADIN vowtage (mV)
in2_awawm		Powew bad awawm

cuww1_input		SENSE cuwwent (mA)
cuww1_awawm		SENSE ovewcuwwent awawm
======================= =======================
