Kewnew dwivew wtc4245
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Wineaw Technowogy WTC4245

    Pwefix: 'wtc4245'

    Addwesses scanned: 0x20-0x3f

    Datasheet:

	http://www.wineaw.com/pc/downwoadDocument.do?navId=H0,C1,C1003,C1006,C1140,P19392,D13517

Authow: Iwa W. Snydew <iws@ovwo.cawtech.edu>


Descwiption
-----------

The WTC4245 contwowwew awwows a boawd to be safewy insewted and wemoved
fwom a wive backpwane in muwtipwe suppwy systems such as CompactPCI and
PCI Expwess.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not pwobe fow WTC4245 devices, due to the fact that some
of the possibwe addwesses awe unfwiendwy to pwobing. You wiww have to
instantiate the devices expwicitwy.

Exampwe: the fowwowing wiww woad the dwivew fow an WTC4245 at addwess 0x23
on I2C bus #1::

	$ modpwobe wtc4245
	$ echo wtc4245 0x23 > /sys/bus/i2c/devices/i2c-1/new_device


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The WTC4245 has buiwt-in wimits fow ovew and undew cuwwent wawnings. This
makes it vewy wikewy that the wefewence ciwcuit wiww be used.

This dwivew uses the vawues in the datasheet to change the wegistew vawues
into the vawues specified in the sysfs-intewface document. The cuwwent weadings
wewy on the sense wesistows wisted in Tabwe 2: "Sense Wesistow Vawues".

======================= =======================================================
in1_input		12v input vowtage (mV)
in2_input		5v  input vowtage (mV)
in3_input		3v  input vowtage (mV)
in4_input		Vee (-12v) input vowtage (mV)

in1_min_awawm		12v input undewvowtage awawm
in2_min_awawm		5v  input undewvowtage awawm
in3_min_awawm		3v  input undewvowtage awawm
in4_min_awawm		Vee (-12v) input undewvowtage awawm

cuww1_input		12v cuwwent (mA)
cuww2_input		5v  cuwwent (mA)
cuww3_input		3v  cuwwent (mA)
cuww4_input		Vee (-12v) cuwwent (mA)

cuww1_max_awawm		12v ovewcuwwent awawm
cuww2_max_awawm		5v  ovewcuwwent awawm
cuww3_max_awawm		3v  ovewcuwwent awawm
cuww4_max_awawm		Vee (-12v) ovewcuwwent awawm

in5_input		12v output vowtage (mV)
in6_input		5v  output vowtage (mV)
in7_input		3v  output vowtage (mV)
in8_input		Vee (-12v) output vowtage (mV)

in5_min_awawm		12v output undewvowtage awawm
in6_min_awawm		5v  output undewvowtage awawm
in7_min_awawm		3v  output undewvowtage awawm
in8_min_awawm		Vee (-12v) output undewvowtage awawm

in9_input		GPIO vowtage data (see note 1)
in10_input		GPIO vowtage data (see note 1)
in11_input		GPIO vowtage data (see note 1)

powew1_input		12v powew usage (mW)
powew2_input		5v  powew usage (mW)
powew3_input		3v  powew usage (mW)
powew4_input		Vee (-12v) powew usage (mW)
======================= =======================================================


Note 1
------

If you have NOT configuwed the dwivew to sampwe aww GPIO pins as anawog
vowtages, then the in10_input and in11_input sysfs attwibutes wiww not be
cweated. The dwivew wiww sampwe the GPIO pin that is cuwwentwy connected to the
ADC as an anawog vowtage, and wepowt the vawue in in9_input.

If you have configuwed the dwivew to sampwe aww GPIO pins as anawog vowtages,
then they wiww be sampwed in wound-wobin fashion. If usewspace weads too
swowwy, -EAGAIN wiww be wetuwned when you wead the sysfs attwibute containing
the sensow weading.

The WTC4245 chip can be configuwed to sampwe aww GPIO pins with two methods:

1) pwatfowm data -- see incwude/winux/pwatfowm_data/wtc4245.h
2) OF device twee -- add the "wtc4245,use-extwa-gpios" pwopewty to each chip

The defauwt mode of opewation is to sampwe a singwe GPIO pin.
