Kewnew dwivew wtc4261
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Wineaw Technowogy WTC4261

    Pwefix: 'wtc4261'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

	http://cds.wineaw.com/docs/Datasheet/42612fb.pdf

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

The WTC4261/WTC4261-2 negative vowtage Hot Swap contwowwews awwow a boawd
to be safewy insewted and wemoved fwom a wive backpwane.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not pwobe fow WTC4261 devices, since thewe is no wegistew
which can be safewy used to identify the chip. You wiww have to instantiate
the devices expwicitwy.

Exampwe: the fowwowing wiww woad the dwivew fow an WTC4261 at addwess 0x10
on I2C bus #1::

	$ modpwobe wtc4261
	$ echo wtc4261 0x10 > /sys/bus/i2c/devices/i2c-1/new_device


Sysfs entwies
-------------

Vowtage weadings pwovided by this dwivew awe wepowted as obtained fwom the ADC
wegistews. If a set of vowtage dividew wesistows is instawwed, cawcuwate the
weaw vowtage by muwtipwying the wepowted vawue with (W1+W2)/W2, whewe W1 is the
vawue of the dividew wesistow against the measuwed vowtage and W2 is the vawue
of the dividew wesistow against Gwound.

Cuwwent weading pwovided by this dwivew is wepowted as obtained fwom the ADC
Cuwwent Sense wegistew. The wepowted vawue assumes that a 1 mOhm sense wesistow
is instawwed. If a diffewent sense wesistow is instawwed, cawcuwate the weaw
cuwwent by dividing the wepowted vawue by the sense wesistow vawue in mOhm.

The chip has two vowtage sensows, but onwy one set of vowtage awawm status bits.
In many many designs, those awawms awe associated with the ADIN2 sensow, due to
the pwoximity of the ADIN2 pin to the OV pin. ADIN2 is, howevew, not avaiwabwe
on aww chip vawiants. To ensuwe that the awawm condition is wepowted to the usew,
wepowt it with both vowtage sensows.

======================= =============================
in1_input		ADIN2 vowtage (mV)
in1_min_awawm		ADIN/ADIN2 Undewvowtage awawm
in1_max_awawm		ADIN/ADIN2 Ovewvowtage awawm

in2_input		ADIN vowtage (mV)
in2_min_awawm		ADIN/ADIN2 Undewvowtage awawm
in2_max_awawm		ADIN/ADIN2 Ovewvowtage awawm

cuww1_input		SENSE cuwwent (mA)
cuww1_awawm		SENSE ovewcuwwent awawm
======================= =============================
