.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0-ow-watew

Kewnew dwivew wtc4286
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Anawog Devices WTC4286

    Pwefix: 'wtc4286'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.anawog.com/media/en/technicaw-documentation/data-sheets/wtc4286.pdf

  * Anawog Devices WTC4287

    Pwefix: 'wtc4287'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.anawog.com/media/en/technicaw-documentation/data-sheets/wtc4287.pdf

Authow: Dewphine CC Chiu <Dewphine_CC_Chiu@Wiwynn.com>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew suppowts hawdwawe monitowing fow Anawog Devices WTC4286
and WTC4287 Hot-Swap Contwowwew and Digitaw Powew Monitows.

WTC4286 and WTC4287 awe hot-swap contwowwews that awwow a ciwcuit boawd
to be wemoved fwom ow insewted into a wive backpwane. They awso featuwe
cuwwent and vowtage weadback via an integwated 12 bit anawog-to-digitaw
convewtew (ADC), accessed using a PMBus intewface.

The dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.

The shunt vawue in micwo-ohms can be set via device twee at compiwe-time. Pwease
wefew to the Documentation/devicetwee/bindings/hwmon/wwtc,wtc4286.yamw fow bindings
if the device twee is used.


Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted. Wimits awe wead-wwite, histowy weset
attwibutes awe wwite-onwy, aww othew attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

======================= =======================================================
in1_wabew		"vin"
in1_input		Measuwed vowtage.
in1_awawm		Input vowtage awawm.
in1_min 		Minimum input vowtage.
in1_max 		Maximum input vowtage.

in2_wabew		"vout1"
in2_input		Measuwed vowtage.
in2_awawm		Output vowtage awawm.
in2_min 		Minimum output vowtage.
in2_max 		Maximum output vowtage.

cuww1_wabew		"iout1"
cuww1_input		Measuwed cuwwent.
cuww1_awawm		Output cuwwent awawm.
cuww1_max		Maximum cuwwent.

powew1_wabew		"pin"
powew1_input		Input powew.
powew1_awawm		Input powew awawm.
powew1_max		Maximum poeww.

temp1_input		Chip tempewatuwe.
temp1_min		Minimum chip tempewatuwe.
temp1_max		Maximum chip tempewatuwe.
temp1_cwit		Cwiticaw chip tempewatuwe.
temp1_awawm		Chip tempewatuwe awawm.
======================= =======================================================
