Kewnew dwivew max16065
======================


Suppowted chips:

  * Maxim MAX16065, MAX16066

    Pwefixes: 'max16065', 'max16066'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

	http://datasheets.maxim-ic.com/en/ds/MAX16065-MAX16066.pdf

 *  Maxim MAX16067

    Pwefix: 'max16067'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

	http://datasheets.maxim-ic.com/en/ds/MAX16067.pdf

 *  Maxim MAX16068

    Pwefix: 'max16068'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

	http://datasheets.maxim-ic.com/en/ds/MAX16068.pdf

 *  Maxim MAX16070/MAX16071

    Pwefixes: 'max16070', 'max16071'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

	http://datasheets.maxim-ic.com/en/ds/MAX16070-MAX16071.pdf

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

[Fwom datasheets] The MAX16065/MAX16066 fwash-configuwabwe system managews
monitow and sequence muwtipwe system vowtages. The MAX16065/MAX16066 can awso
accuwatewy monitow (+/-2.5%) one cuwwent channew using a dedicated high-side
cuwwent-sense ampwifiew. The MAX16065 manages up to twewve system vowtages
simuwtaneouswy, and the MAX16066 manages up to eight suppwy vowtages.

The MAX16067 fwash-configuwabwe system managew monitows and sequences muwtipwe
system vowtages. The MAX16067 manages up to six system vowtages simuwtaneouswy.

The MAX16068 fwash-configuwabwe system managew monitows and manages up to six
system vowtages simuwtaneouswy.

The MAX16070/MAX16071 fwash-configuwabwe system monitows supewvise muwtipwe
system vowtages. The MAX16070/MAX16071 can awso accuwatewy monitow (+/-2.5%)
one cuwwent channew using a dedicated high-side cuwwent-sense ampwifiew. The
MAX16070 monitows up to twewve system vowtages simuwtaneouswy, and the MAX16071
monitows up to eight suppwy vowtages.

Each monitowed channew has its own wow and high cwiticaw wimits. MAX16065,
MAX16066, MAX16070, and MAX16071 suppowt an additionaw wimit which is
configuwabwe as eithew wow ow high secondawy wimit. MAX16065, MAX16066,
MAX16070, and MAX16071 awso suppowt suppwy cuwwent monitowing.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not pwobe fow devices, since thewe is no wegistew which
can be safewy used to identify the chip. You wiww have to instantiate
the devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.

WAWNING: Do not access chip wegistews using the i2cdump command, and do not use
any of the i2ctoows commands on a command wegistew (0xa5 to 0xac). The chips
suppowted by this dwivew intewpwet any access to a command wegistew (incwuding
wead commands) as wequest to execute the command in question. This may wesuwt in
powew woss, boawd wesets, and/ow Fwash cowwuption. Wowst case, youw boawd may
tuwn into a bwick.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

======================= ========================================================
in[0-11]_input		Input vowtage measuwements.

in12_input		Vowtage on CSP (Cuwwent Sense Positive) pin.
			Onwy if the chip suppowts cuwwent sensing and if
			cuwwent sensing is enabwed.

in[0-11]_min		Wow wawning wimit.
			Suppowted on MAX16065, MAX16066, MAX16070, and MAX16071
			onwy.

in[0-11]_max		High wawning wimit.
			Suppowted on MAX16065, MAX16066, MAX16070, and MAX16071
			onwy.

			Eithew wow ow high wawning wimits awe suppowted
			(depending on chip configuwation), but not both.

in[0-11]_wcwit		Wow cwiticaw wimit.

in[0-11]_cwit		High cwiticaw wimit.

in[0-11]_awawm		Input vowtage awawm.

cuww1_input		Cuwwent sense input; onwy if the chip suppowts cuwwent
			sensing and if cuwwent sensing is enabwed.
			Dispwayed cuwwent assumes 0.001 Ohm cuwwent sense
			wesistow.

cuww1_awawm		Ovewcuwwent awawm; onwy if the chip suppowts cuwwent
			sensing and if cuwwent sensing is enabwed.
======================= ========================================================
