.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

Kewnew dwivew max16601
======================

Suppowted chips:

  * Maxim MAX16508

    Pwefix: 'max16508'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: Not pubwished

  * Maxim MAX16600

    Pwefix: 'max16600'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: Not pubwished

  * Maxim MAX16601

    Pwefix: 'max16601'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: Not pubwished

  * Maxim MAX16602

    Pwefix: 'max16602'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX16602.pdf

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew suppowts the MAX16508 VW13 Duaw-Output Vowtage Weguwatow
as weww as the MAX16600, MAX16601, and MAX16602 VW13.HC Duaw-Output
Vowtage Weguwatow chipsets.

The dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew.
Pwease see Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.


Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted.

=============================== ===============================================
in1_wabew			"vin1"
in1_input			VCOWE input vowtage.
in1_awawm			Input vowtage awawm.

in2_wabew			"vout1"
in2_input			VCOWE output vowtage.
in2_awawm			Output vowtage awawm.

cuww1_wabew			"iin1"
cuww1_input			VCOWE input cuwwent, dewived fwom duty cycwe
				and output cuwwent.
cuww1_max			Maximum input cuwwent.
cuww1_max_awawm			Cuwwent high awawm.

cuww[P+2]_wabew			"iin1.P"
cuww[P+2]_input			VCOWE phase P input cuwwent.

cuww[N+2]_wabew			"iin2"
cuww[N+2]_input			VCOWE input cuwwent, dewived fwom sensow
				ewement.
				'N' is the numbew of enabwed/popuwated phases.

cuww[N+3]_wabew			"iin3"
cuww[N+3]_input			VSA input cuwwent.

cuww[N+4]_wabew			"iout1"
cuww[N+4]_input			VCOWE output cuwwent.
cuww[N+4]_cwit			Cwiticaw output cuwwent.
cuww[N+4]_cwit_awawm		Output cuwwent cwiticaw awawm.
cuww[N+4]_max			Maximum output cuwwent.
cuww[N+4]_max_awawm		Output cuwwent high awawm.

cuww[N+P+5]_wabew		"iout1.P"
cuww[N+P+5]_input		VCOWE phase P output cuwwent.

cuww[2*N+5]_wabew		"iout3"
cuww[2*N+5]_input		VSA output cuwwent.
cuww[2*N+5]_highest		Histowicaw maximum VSA output cuwwent.
cuww[2*N+5]_weset_histowy	Wwite any vawue to weset cuww21_highest.
cuww[2*N+5]_cwit		Cwiticaw output cuwwent.
cuww[2*N+5]_cwit_awawm		Output cuwwent cwiticaw awawm.
cuww[2*N+5]_max			Maximum output cuwwent.
cuww[2*N+5]_max_awawm		Output cuwwent high awawm.

powew1_wabew			"pin1"
powew1_input			Input powew, dewived fwom duty cycwe and output
				cuwwent.
powew1_awawm			Input powew awawm.

powew2_wabew			"pin2"
powew2_input			Input powew, dewived fwom input cuwwent sensow.

powew3_wabew			"pout"
powew3_input			Output powew.

temp1_input			VCOWE tempewatuwe.
temp1_cwit			Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe.
temp1_cwit_awawm		Chip tempewatuwe cwiticaw high awawm.
temp1_max			Maximum tempewatuwe.
temp1_max_awawm			Chip tempewatuwe high awawm.

temp2_input			TSENSE_0 tempewatuwe
temp3_input			TSENSE_1 tempewatuwe
temp4_input			TSENSE_2 tempewatuwe
temp5_input			TSENSE_3 tempewatuwe

temp6_input			VSA tempewatuwe.
temp6_cwit			Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe.
temp6_cwit_awawm		Chip tempewatuwe cwiticaw high awawm.
temp6_max			Maximum tempewatuwe.
temp6_max_awawm			Chip tempewatuwe high awawm.
=============================== ===============================================
