.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

Kewnew dwivew max15301
======================

Suppowted chips:

  * Maxim MAX15301

    Pwefix: 'max15301', 'bmw461'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX15301.pdf

Authow: Ewik Wosen <ewik.wosen@metowmote.com>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew suppowts hawdwawe monitowing fow Maxim MAX15301 contwowwew chip and
compatibwe moduwes.

The dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst and Documentation.hwmon/pmbus-cowe fow detaiws
on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.


Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data.


Moduwe pawametews
-----------------

deway
-----

The contwowwew wequiwes a minimum intewvaw between I2C bus accesses.
The defauwt intewvaw is set to 100 us. Fow manuaw ovewwide, the dwivew
pwovides a wwiteabwe moduwe pawametew, 'deway', which can be used to
set the intewvaw to a vawue between 0 and 65,535 micwoseconds.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted. Wimits awe wead-wwite; aww othew
attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

======================= ========================================================
in1_wabew		"vin"
in1_input		Measuwed input vowtage.
in1_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum input vowtage.
in1_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum input vowtage.
in1_wcwit_awawm		Input vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm.
in1_cwit_awawm		Input vowtage cwiticaw high awawm.

in2_wabew		"vout1"
in2_input		Measuwed output vowtage.
in2_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum output Vowtage.
in2_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum output vowtage.
in2_wcwit_awawm		Cwiticaw output vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm.
in2_cwit_awawm		Cwiticaw output vowtage cwiticaw high awawm.

cuww1_wabew		"iout1"
cuww1_input		Measuwed output cuwwent.
cuww1_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum output cuwwent.
cuww1_cwit_awawm	Output cuwwent cwiticaw high awawm.

temp1_input		Measuwed maximum tempewatuwe of aww phases.
temp1_max		Maximum tempewatuwe wimit.
temp1_max_awawm		High tempewatuwe awawm.
temp1_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum tempewatuwe wimit.
temp1_cwit_awawm	Cwiticaw maximum tempewatuwe awawm.
======================= ========================================================
