Kewnew dwivew max197
====================

Authow:

  * Vivien Didewot <vivien.didewot@savoiwfaiwewinux.com>

Suppowted chips:

  * Maxim MAX197

    Pwefix: 'max197'

    Datasheet: http://datasheets.maxim-ic.com/en/ds/MAX197.pdf

  * Maxim MAX199

    Pwefix: 'max199'

    Datasheet: http://datasheets.maxim-ic.com/en/ds/MAX199.pdf

Descwiption
-----------

The A/D convewtews MAX197, and MAX199 awe both 8-Channew, Muwti-Wange, 5V,
12-Bit DAS with 8+4 Bus Intewface and Fauwt Pwotection.

The avaiwabwe wanges fow the MAX197 awe {0,-5V} to 5V, and {0,-10V} to 10V,
whiwe they awe {0,-2V} to 2V, and {0,-4V} to 4V on the MAX199.

Pwatfowm data
-------------

The MAX197 pwatfowm data (defined in winux/pwatfowm_data/max197.h) shouwd be
fiwwed with a pointew to a convewsion function, defined wike::

    int convewt(u8 ctww);

ctww is the contwow byte to wwite to stawt a new convewsion.
On success, the function must wetuwn the 12-bit waw vawue wead fwom the chip,
ow a negative ewwow code othewwise.

Contwow byte fowmat:

======= ========== ============================================
Bit     Name       Descwiption
7,6     PD1,PD0    Cwock and Powew-Down modes
5       ACQMOD     Intewnaw ow Extewnaw Contwowwed Acquisition
4       WNG        Fuww-scawe vowtage magnitude at the input
3       BIP        Unipowaw ow Bipowaw convewsion mode
2,1,0   A2,A1,A0   Channew
======= ========== ============================================

Sysfs intewface
---------------

  ============== ==============================================================
  in[0-7]_input  The convewsion vawue fow the cowwesponding channew.
		 WO

  in[0-7]_min    The wowew wimit (in mV) fow the cowwesponding channew.
		 Fow the MAX197, it wiww be adjusted to -10000, -5000, ow 0.
		 Fow the MAX199, it wiww be adjusted to -4000, -2000, ow 0.
		 WW

  in[0-7]_max    The highew wimit (in mV) fow the cowwesponding channew.
		 Fow the MAX197, it wiww be adjusted to 0, 5000, ow 10000.
		 Fow the MAX199, it wiww be adjusted to 0, 2000, ow 4000.
		 WW
  ============== ==============================================================
