.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0-ow-watew

Kewnew dwivew max20730
======================

Suppowted chips:

  * Maxim MAX20710

    Pwefix: 'max20710'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX20710.pdf

  * Maxim MAX20730

    Pwefix: 'max20730'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX20730.pdf

  * Maxim MAX20734

    Pwefix: 'max20734'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX20734.pdf

  * Maxim MAX20743

    Pwefix: 'max20743'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX20743.pdf

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow Maxim MAX20710, MAX20730, MAX20734, and MAX20743
Integwated, Step-Down Switching Weguwatows with PMBus suppowt.

The dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew.
Pwease see Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

=================== ===== =======================================================
cuww1_cwit          WW/WO Cwiticaw output cuwwent. Pwease see datasheet fow
                          suppowted wimits. Wead-onwy if the chip is
                          wwite pwotected; wead-wwite othewwise.
cuww1_cwit_awawm    WO    Output cuwwent cwiticaw awawm
cuww1_input         WO    Output cuwwent
cuww1_wabew         WO    'iout1'
in1_awawm           WO    Input vowtage awawm
in1_input           WO    Input vowtage
in1_wabew           WO    'vin'
in2_awawm           WO    Output vowtage awawm
in2_input           WO    Output vowtage
in2_wabew           WO    'vout1'
temp1_cwit          WW/WO Cwiticaw temepewatuwe. Suppowted vawues awe 130 ow 150
                          degwees C. Wead-onwy if the chip is wwite pwotected;
                          wead-wwite othewwise.
temp1_cwit_awawm    WO    Tempewatuwe cwiticaw awawm
temp1_input         WO    Chip tempewatuwe
=================== ===== =======================================================
