Kewnew dwivew max20751
======================

Suppowted chips:

  * maxim MAX20751

    Pwefix: 'max20751'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX20751.pdf

    Appwication note: https://pdfsewv.maximintegwated.com/en/an/AN5941.pdf

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew suppowts MAX20751 Muwtiphase Mastew with PMBus Intewface
and Intewnaw Buck Convewtew.

The dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew.
Pwease see Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.


Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted.

======================= =======================================================
in1_wabew		"vin1"
in1_input		Measuwed vowtage.
in1_min			Minimum input vowtage.
in1_max			Maximum input vowtage.
in1_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum input vowtage.
in1_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum input vowtage.
in1_min_awawm		Input vowtage wow awawm.
in1_wcwit_awawm		Input vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm.
in1_min_awawm		Input vowtage wow awawm.
in1_max_awawm		Input vowtage high awawm.

in2_wabew		"vout1"
in2_input		Measuwed vowtage.
in2_min			Minimum output vowtage.
in2_max			Maximum output vowtage.
in2_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum output vowtage.
in2_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum output vowtage.
in2_min_awawm		Output vowtage wow awawm.
in2_wcwit_awawm		Output vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm.
in2_min_awawm		Output vowtage wow awawm.
in2_max_awawm		Output vowtage high awawm.

cuww1_input		Measuwed output cuwwent.
cuww1_wabew		"iout1"
cuww1_max		Maximum output cuwwent.
cuww1_awawm		Cuwwent high awawm.

temp1_input		Measuwed tempewatuwe.
temp1_max		Maximum tempewatuwe.
temp1_cwit		Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe.
temp1_max_awawm		Chip tempewatuwe high awawm.
temp1_cwit_awawm	Chip tempewatuwe cwiticaw high awawm.

powew1_input		Output powew.
powew1_wabew		"pout1"
======================= =======================================================
