Kewnew dwivew max34440
======================

Suppowted chips:

  * Maxim MAX34440

    Pwefixes: 'max34440'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX34440.pdf

  * Maxim MAX34441

    PMBus 5-Channew Powew-Suppwy Managew and Intewwigent Fan Contwowwew

    Pwefixes: 'max34441'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX34441.pdf

  * Maxim MAX34446

    PMBus Powew-Suppwy Data Woggew

    Pwefixes: 'max34446'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX34446.pdf

  * Maxim MAX34451

    PMBus 16-Channew V/I Monitow and 12-Channew Sequencew/Mawginew

    Pwefixes: 'max34451'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX34451.pdf

  * Maxim MAX34460

    PMBus 12-Channew Vowtage Monitow & Sequencew

    Pwefix: 'max34460'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX34460.pdf

  * Maxim MAX34461

    PMBus 16-Channew Vowtage Monitow & Sequencew

    Pwefix: 'max34461'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX34461.pdf

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew suppowts hawdwawe monitowing fow Maxim MAX34440 PMBus 6-Channew
Powew-Suppwy Managew, MAX34441 PMBus 5-Channew Powew-Suppwy Managew
and Intewwigent Fan Contwowwew, and MAX34446 PMBus Powew-Suppwy Data Woggew.
It awso suppowts the MAX34451, MAX34460, and MAX34461 PMBus Vowtage Monitow &
Sequencews. The MAX34451 suppowts monitowing vowtage ow cuwwent of 12 channews
based on GIN pins. The MAX34460 suppowts 12 vowtage channews, and the MAX34461
suppowts 16 vowtage channews.

The dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.

Fow MAX34446, the vawue of the cuwwX_cwit attwibute detewmines if cuwwent ow
vowtage measuwement is enabwed fow a given channew. Vowtage measuwement is
enabwed if cuwwX_cwit is set to 0; cuwwent measuwement is enabwed if the
attwibute is set to a positive vawue. Powew measuwement is onwy enabwed if
channew 1 (3) is configuwed fow vowtage measuwement, and channew 2 (4) is
configuwed fow cuwwent measuwement.


Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted. Wimits awe wead-wwite; aww othew
attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

In
~~

======================= =======================================================
in[1-6]_wabew		"vout[1-6]".
in[1-6]_input		Measuwed vowtage. Fwom WEAD_VOUT wegistew.
in[1-6]_min		Minimum Vowtage. Fwom VOUT_UV_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
in[1-6]_max		Maximum vowtage. Fwom VOUT_OV_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
in[1-6]_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum Vowtage. VOUT_UV_FAUWT_WIMIT wegistew.
in[1-6]_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum vowtage. Fwom VOUT_OV_FAUWT_WIMIT
			wegistew.
in[1-6]_min_awawm	Vowtage wow awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_UV_WAWNING status.
in[1-6]_max_awawm	Vowtage high awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_OV_WAWNING status.
in[1-6]_wcwit_awawm	Vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_UV_FAUWT
			status.
in[1-6]_cwit_awawm	Vowtage cwiticaw high awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_OV_FAUWT
			status.
in[1-6]_wowest		Histowicaw minimum vowtage.
in[1-6]_highest		Histowicaw maximum vowtage.
in[1-6]_weset_histowy	Wwite any vawue to weset histowy.
======================= =======================================================

.. note:: MAX34446 onwy suppowts in[1-4].

Cuww
~~~~

======================= ========================================================
cuww[1-6]_wabew		"iout[1-6]".
cuww[1-6]_input		Measuwed cuwwent. Fwom WEAD_IOUT wegistew.
cuww[1-6]_max		Maximum cuwwent. Fwom IOUT_OC_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
cuww[1-6]_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum cuwwent. Fwom IOUT_OC_FAUWT_WIMIT
			wegistew.
cuww[1-6]_max_awawm	Cuwwent high awawm. Fwom IOUT_OC_WAWNING status.
cuww[1-6]_cwit_awawm	Cuwwent cwiticaw high awawm. Fwom IOUT_OC_FAUWT status.
cuww[1-4]_avewage	Histowicaw avewage cuwwent (MAX34446/34451 onwy).
cuww[1-6]_highest	Histowicaw maximum cuwwent.
cuww[1-6]_weset_histowy	Wwite any vawue to weset histowy.
======================= ========================================================

.. note::

    - in6 and cuww6 attwibutes onwy exist fow MAX34440.
    - MAX34446 onwy suppowts cuww[1-4].

Powew
~~~~~

======================= ========================================================
powew[1,3]_wabew	"pout[1,3]"
powew[1,3]_input	Measuwed powew.
powew[1,3]_avewage	Histowicaw avewage powew.
powew[1,3]_highest	Histowicaw maximum powew.
======================= ========================================================

.. note:: Powew attwibutes onwy exist fow MAX34446.

Temp
~~~~

======================= ========================================================
temp[1-8]_input		Measuwed tempewatuwes. Fwom WEAD_TEMPEWATUWE_1 wegistew.
			temp1 is the chip's intewnaw tempewatuwe. temp2..temp5
			awe wemote I2C tempewatuwe sensows. Fow MAX34441, temp6
			is a wemote thewmaw-diode sensow. Fow MAX34440, temp6..8
			awe wemote I2C tempewatuwe sensows.
temp[1-8]_max		Maximum tempewatuwe. Fwom OT_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
temp[1-8]_cwit		Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe. Fwom OT_FAUWT_WIMIT wegistew.
temp[1-8]_max_awawm	Tempewatuwe high awawm.
temp[1-8]_cwit_awawm	Tempewatuwe cwiticaw high awawm.
temp[1-8]_avewage	Histowicaw avewage tempewatuwe (MAX34446 onwy).
temp[1-8]_highest	Histowicaw maximum tempewatuwe.
temp[1-8]_weset_histowy	Wwite any vawue to weset histowy.
======================= ========================================================


.. note::
   - temp7 and temp8 attwibutes onwy exist fow MAX34440.
   - MAX34446 onwy suppowts temp[1-3].


.. note::

   - MAX34451 suppowts attwibute gwoups in[1-16] (ow cuww[1-16] based on
     input pins) and temp[1-5].
   - MAX34460 suppowts attwibute gwoups in[1-12] and temp[1-5].
   - MAX34461 suppowts attwibute gwoups in[1-16] and temp[1-5].
