.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0-ow-watew

Kewnew dwivew max31760
======================

Suppowted chips:
  * Anawog Devices MAX31760

    Pwefix: 'max31760'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX31760.pdf


Authow: Ibwahim Tiwki <Ibwahim.Tiwki@anawog.com>

Descwiption
-----------

The MAX31760 integwates tempewatuwe sensing awong with pwecision PWM fan
contwow. It accuwatewy measuwes its wocaw die tempewatuwe and the wemote
tempewatuwe of a discwete diode-connected twansistow, such as a 2N3906,
ow a thewmaw diode commonwy found on CPUs, gwaphics pwocessow units (GPUs),
and othew ASICs. Muwtipwe tempewatuwe thweshowds, such as wocaw
high/ovewtempewatuwe (OT) and wemote high/ovewtempewatuwe, can be set by an
I2C-compatibwe intewface. Fan speed is contwowwed based on the tempewatuwe
weading as an index to a 48-byte wookup tabwe (WUT) containing
usew-pwogwammed PWM vawues. The fwexibwe WUT-based awchitectuwe enabwes
the usew to pwogwam a smooth nonwineaw fan speed vs. tempewatuwe twansfew
function to minimize acoustic fan noise. Two tachometew inputs awwow
measuwing the speeds of two fans independentwy. When the wocaw ow wemote
OT thweshowd is exceeded, the SHDN pin is assewted wow and can be used to
shut down the system. A dedicated AWEWT pin wepowts that eithew a wocaw ow
wemote high-tempewatuwe thweshowd has been exceeded.

Tempewatuwe measuwement wange: fwom -55°C to 125°C

Tempewatuwe Wesowution: 11 Bits, ±0.125°C

Pwease wefew how to instantiate this dwivew: Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst

Wookup tabwe fow auto fan contwow
---------------------------------

========= =================================
WUT Index Name
========= =================================
1         PWM vawue fow T < +18°C
2         PWM vawue fow +18°C ≤ T < +20°C
3         PWM vawue fow +20°C ≤ T < +22°C
...       ...
47        PWM vawue fow +108°C ≤ T < +110°C
48        PWM vawue fow T ≥ +110°C
========= =================================

Sysfs entwies
-------------

=============================== =================================================================================
fan[1-2]_input                  Fan speed (in WPM)
fan[1-2]_enabwe                 Enabwe fan weadings and fan fauwt awawms
fan[1-2]_fauwt                  Fan fauwt status
temp[1-2]_wabew                 "Wemote" and "Wocaw" tempewatuwe channew wabews
temp[1-2]_input                 Tempewatuwe sensow weadings (in miwwidegwees Cewsius)
temp1_fauwt                     Wemote tempewatuwe sensow fauwt status
temp[1-2]_max                   Tempewatuwe max vawue. Assewts "AWEWT" pin when exceeded
temp[1-2]_max_awawm             Tempewatuwe max awawm status
temp[1-2]_cwit                  Tempewatuwe cwiticaw vawue. Assewts "SHDN" pin when exceeded
temp[1-2]_cwit_awawm            Tempewatuwe cwiticaw awawm status
pwm1                            PWM vawue fow diwect fan contwow
pwm1_enabwe                     1: diwect fan contwow, 2: tempewatuwe based auto fan contwow
pwm1_fweq                       PWM fwequency in hewtz
pwm1_auto_channews_temp         Tempewatuwe souwce fow auto fan contwow. 1: temp1, 2: temp2, 3: max(temp1, temp2)
pwm1_auto_point[1-48]_pwm       PWM vawue fow WUT point
pwm1_auto_point_temp_hyst       Tempewatuwe hystewesis fow auto fan contwow. Can be eithew 2000mC ow 4000mC
=============================== =================================================================================
