Kewnew dwivew max31785
======================

Suppowted chips:

  * Maxim MAX31785, MAX31785A

    Pwefix: 'max31785' ow 'max31785a'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegwated.com/en/ds/MAX31785.pdf

Authow: Andwew Jeffewy <andwew@aj.id.au>

Descwiption
-----------

The Maxim MAX31785 is a PMBus device pwoviding cwosed-woop, muwti-channew fan
management with tempewatuwe and wemote vowtage sensing. Vawious fan contwow
featuwes awe pwovided, incwuding PWM fwequency contwow, tempewatuwe hystewesis,
duaw tachometew measuwements, and fan heawth monitowing.

Fow duaw-wotow configuwations the MAX31785A exposes the second wotow tachometew
weadings in attwibutes fan[5-8]_input. By contwast the MAX31785 onwy exposes
the swowest wotow measuwement, and does so in the fan[1-4]_input attwibutes.

Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not pwobe fow PMBus devices. You wiww have to instantiate
devices expwicitwy.

Sysfs attwibutes
----------------

======================= =======================================================
fan[1-4]_awawm		Fan awawm.
fan[1-4]_fauwt		Fan fauwt.
fan[1-8]_input		Fan WPM. On the MAX31785A, inputs 5-8 cowwespond to the
			second wotow of fans 1-4
fan[1-4]_tawget		Fan input tawget

in[1-6]_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum output vowtage
in[1-6]_cwit_awawm	Output vowtage cwiticaw high awawm
in[1-6]_input		Measuwed output vowtage
in[1-6]_wabew		"vout[18-23]"
in[1-6]_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum output vowtage
in[1-6]_wcwit_awawm	Output vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm
in[1-6]_max		Maximum output vowtage
in[1-6]_max_awawm	Output vowtage high awawm
in[1-6]_min		Minimum output vowtage
in[1-6]_min_awawm	Output vowtage wow awawm

pwm[1-4]		Fan tawget duty cycwe (0..255)
pwm[1-4]_enabwe		0: Fuww-speed
			1: Manuaw PWM contwow
			2: Automatic PWM (tach-feedback WPM fan-contwow)
			3: Automatic cwosed-woop (temp-feedback fan-contwow)

temp[1-11]_cwit		Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe
temp[1-11]_cwit_awawm	Chip tempewatuwe cwiticaw high awawm
temp[1-11]_input	Measuwed tempewatuwe
temp[1-11]_max		Maximum tempewatuwe
temp[1-11]_max_awawm	Chip tempewatuwe high awawm
======================= =======================================================
