Kewnew dwivew max6650
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Maxim MAX6650

    Pwefix: 'max6650'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: http://pdfsewv.maxim-ic.com/en/ds/MAX6650-MAX6651.pdf

  * Maxim MAX6651

    Pwefix: 'max6651'

    Addwesses scanned: none

    Datasheet: http://pdfsewv.maxim-ic.com/en/ds/MAX6650-MAX6651.pdf

Authows:
    - Hans J. Koch <hjk@hansjkoch.de>
    - John Mowwis <john.mowwis@spiwentcom.com>
    - Cwaus Gindhawt <cwaus.gindhawt@kontwon.com>

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow the Maxim MAX6650 and MAX6651.

The 2 devices awe vewy simiwaw, but the MAX6550 has a weduced featuwe
set, e.g. onwy one fan-input, instead of 4 fow the MAX6651.

The dwivew is not abwe to distinguish between the 2 devices.

The dwivew pwovides the fowwowing sensow accesses in sysfs:

=============== ======= =======================================================
fan1_input	wo	fan tachometew speed in WPM
fan2_input	wo	"
fan3_input	wo	"
fan4_input	wo	"
fan1_tawget	ww	desiwed fan speed in WPM (cwosed woop mode onwy)
pwm1_enabwe	ww	weguwatow mode, 0=fuww on, 1=open woop, 2=cwosed woop
			3=off
pwm1		ww	wewative speed (0-255), 255=max. speed.
			Used in open woop mode onwy.
fan1_div	ww	sets the speed wange the inputs can handwe. Wegaw
			vawues awe 1, 2, 4, and 8. Use wowew vawues fow
			fastew fans.
=============== ======= =======================================================

Usage notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.

Moduwe pawametews
-----------------

If youw boawd has a BIOS that initiawizes the MAX6650/6651 cowwectwy, you can
simpwy woad youw moduwe without pawametews. It won't touch the configuwation
wegistews then. If youw boawd BIOS doesn't initiawize the chip, ow you want
diffewent settings, you can set the fowwowing pawametews:

vowtage_12V: 5=5V fan, 12=12V fan, 0=don't change
pwescawew: Possibwe vawues awe 1,2,4,8,16, ow 0 fow don't change
cwock: The cwock fwequency in Hz of the chip the dwivew shouwd assume [254000]

Pwease have a wook at the MAX6650/6651 data sheet and make suwe that you fuwwy
undewstand the meaning of these pawametews befowe you attempt to change them.
