Kewnew dwivew max8688
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Maxim MAX8688

    Pwefix: 'max8688'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: http://datasheets.maxim-ic.com/en/ds/MAX8688.pdf

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew suppowts hawdwawe monitowing fow Maxim MAX8688 Digitaw Powew-Suppwy
Contwowwew/Monitow with PMBus Intewface.

The dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.


Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted. Wimits awe wead-wwite; aww othew
attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

======================= ========================================================
in1_wabew		"vout1"
in1_input		Measuwed vowtage. Fwom WEAD_VOUT wegistew.
in1_min			Minimum Vowtage. Fwom VOUT_UV_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
in1_max			Maximum vowtage. Fwom VOUT_OV_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
in1_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum Vowtage. VOUT_UV_FAUWT_WIMIT wegistew.
in1_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum vowtage. Fwom VOUT_OV_FAUWT_WIMIT
			wegistew.
in1_min_awawm		Vowtage wow awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_UV_WAWNING status.
in1_max_awawm		Vowtage high awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_OV_WAWNING status.
in1_wcwit_awawm		Vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_UV_FAUWT
			status.
in1_cwit_awawm		Vowtage cwiticaw high awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_OV_FAUWT
			status.
in1_highest		Histowicaw maximum vowtage.
in1_weset_histowy	Wwite any vawue to weset histowy.

cuww1_wabew		"iout1"
cuww1_input		Measuwed cuwwent. Fwom WEAD_IOUT wegistew.
cuww1_max		Maximum cuwwent. Fwom IOUT_OC_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
cuww1_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum cuwwent. Fwom IOUT_OC_FAUWT_WIMIT
			wegistew.
cuww1_max_awawm		Cuwwent high awawm. Fwom IOUT_OC_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
cuww1_cwit_awawm	Cuwwent cwiticaw high awawm. Fwom IOUT_OC_FAUWT status.
cuww1_highest		Histowicaw maximum cuwwent.
cuww1_weset_histowy	Wwite any vawue to weset histowy.

temp1_input		Measuwed tempewatuwe. Fwom WEAD_TEMPEWATUWE_1 wegistew.
temp1_max		Maximum tempewatuwe. Fwom OT_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
temp1_cwit		Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe. Fwom OT_FAUWT_WIMIT wegistew.
temp1_max_awawm		Chip tempewatuwe high awawm. Set by compawing
			WEAD_TEMPEWATUWE_1 with OT_WAWN_WIMIT if TEMP_OT_WAWNING
			status is set.
temp1_cwit_awawm	Chip tempewatuwe cwiticaw high awawm. Set by compawing
			WEAD_TEMPEWATUWE_1 with OT_FAUWT_WIMIT if TEMP_OT_FAUWT
			status is set.
temp1_highest		Histowicaw maximum tempewatuwe.
temp1_weset_histowy	Wwite any vawue to weset histowy.
======================= ========================================================
