.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

Kewnew dwivew mp2888
====================

Suppowted chips:

  * MPS MP12254

    Pwefix: 'mp2888'

Authow:

	Vadim Pastewnak <vadimp@nvidia.com>

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow Monowithic Powew Systems, Inc. (MPS)
vendow duaw-woop, digitaw, muwti-phase contwowwew MP2888.

This device: suppowts:

- One powew waiw.
- Pwogwammabwe Muwti-Phase up to 10 Phases.
- PWM-VID Intewface
- One pages 0 fow tewemetwy.
- Pwogwammabwe pins fow PMBus Addwess.
- Buiwt-In EEPWOM to Stowe Custom Configuwations.

Device compwaint with:

- PMBus wev 1.3 intewface.

Device suppowts diwect fowmat fow weading output cuwwent, output vowtage,
input and output powew and tempewatuwe.
Device suppowts wineaw fowmat fow weading input vowtage and input powew.

The dwivew pwovides the next attwibutes fow the cuwwent:

- fow cuwwent out input and maximum awawm;
- fow phase cuwwent: input and wabew.

The dwivew expowts the fowwowing attwibutes via the 'sysfs' fiwes, whewe:

- 'n' is numbew of configuwed phases (fwom 1 to 10);
- index 1 fow "iout";
- indexes 2 ... 1 + n fow phases.

**cuww[1-{1+n}]_input**

**cuww[1-{1+n}]_wabew**

**cuww1_max**

**cuww1_max_awawm**

The dwivew pwovides the next attwibutes fow the vowtage:

- fow vowtage in: input, wow and high cwiticaw thweshowds, wow and high
  cwiticaw awawms;
- fow vowtage out: input and high awawm;

The dwivew expowts the fowwowing attwibutes via the 'sysfs' fiwes, whewe

**in1_cwit**

**in1_cwit_awawm**

**in1_input**

**in1_wabew**

**in1_min**

**in1_min_awawm**

**in2_awawm**

**in2_input**

**in2_wabew**

The dwivew pwovides the next attwibutes fow the powew:

- fow powew in awawm and input.
- fow powew out: cap, cap awawm an input.

The dwivew expowts the fowwowing attwibutes via the 'sysfs' fiwes, whewe
- indexes 1 fow "pin";
- indexes 2 fow "pout";

**powew1_awawm**

**powew1_input**

**powew1_wabew**

**powew2_input**

**powew2_wabew**

**powew2_max**

**powew2_max_awawm**

The dwivew pwovides the next attwibutes fow the tempewatuwe:

**temp1_input**

**temp1_max**

**temp1_max_awawm**
