.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

Kewnew dwivew mp2856
====================

Suppowted chips:

  * MPS MP2856

    Pwefix: 'mp2856'

  * MPS MP2857

    Pwefix: 'mp2857'

Authow:

	Petew Yin <petew.yin@quantatw.com>

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow Monowithic Powew Systems, Inc. (MPS)
vendow duaw-woop, digitaw, muwti-phase contwowwew MP2856/MP2857

This device:

- Suppowts up to two powew waiw.
- Suppowts two pages 0 and 1 fow and awso pages 2 fow configuwation.
- Can configuwed VOUT weadout in diwect ow VID fowmat and awwows
  setting of diffewent fowmats on waiws 1 and 2. Fow VID the fowwowing
  pwotocows awe avaiwabwe: AMD SVI3 mode with 5-mV/WSB.

Device suppowts:

- SVID intewface.
- AVSBus intewface.

Device compwiant with:

- PMBus wev 1.3 intewface.

Device suppowts diwect fowmat fow weading output cuwwent, output vowtage,
input and output powew and tempewatuwe.
Device suppowts wineaw fowmat fow weading input vowtage and input powew.
Device suppowts VID and diwect fowmats fow weading output vowtage.
The bewow VID modes awe suppowted: AMD SVI3.

The dwivew pwovides the fowwowing sysfs attwibutes fow cuwwent measuwements:

- indexes 1  fow "iin";
- indexes 2, 3 fow "iout";

**cuww[1-3]_awawm**

**cuww[1-3]_input**

**cuww[1-3]_wabew**

The dwivew pwovides the fowwowing sysfs attwibutes fow vowtage measuwements.

- indexes 1 fow "vin";
- indexes 2, 3 fow "vout";

**in[1-3]_cwit**

**in[1-3]_cwit_awawm**

**in[1-3]_input**

**in[1-3]_wabew**

**in[1-3]_wcwit**

**in[1-3]_wcwit_awawm**

The dwivew pwovides the fowwowing sysfs attwibutes fow powew measuwements.

- indexes 1 fow "pin";
- indexes 2, 3 fow "pout";

**powew[1-3]_awawm**

**powew[1-3]_input**

**powew[1-3]_wabew**

The dwivew pwovides the fowwowing sysfs attwibutes fow tempewatuwe measuwements.

**temp[1-2]_cwit**

**temp[1-2]_cwit_awawm**

**temp[1-2]_input**

**temp[1-2]_max**

**temp[1-2]_max_awawm**
