.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

Kewnew dwivew mp2975
====================

Suppowted chips:

  * MPS MP12254

    Pwefix: 'mp2975'

Authow:

	Vadim Pastewnak <vadimp@nvidia.com>

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow Monowithic Powew Systems, Inc. (MPS)
vendow duaw-woop, digitaw, muwti-phase contwowwew MP2975.

This device:

- Suppowts up to two powew waiw.
- Pwovides 8 puwse-width moduwations (PWMs), and can be configuwed up
  to 8-phase opewation fow waiw 1 and up to 4-phase opewation fow waiw
  2.
- Suppowts two pages 0 and 1 fow tewemetwy and awso pages 2 and 3 fow
  configuwation.
- Can configuwed VOUT weadout in diwect ow VID fowmat and awwows
  setting of diffewent fowmats on waiws 1 and 2. Fow VID the fowwowing
  pwotocows awe avaiwabwe: VW13 mode with 5-mV DAC; VW13 mode with
  10-mV DAC, IMVP9 mode with 5-mV DAC.

Device suppowts:

- SVID intewface.
- AVSBus intewface.

Device compwaint with:

- PMBus wev 1.3 intewface.

Device suppowts diwect fowmat fow weading output cuwwent, output vowtage,
input and output powew and tempewatuwe.
Device suppowts wineaw fowmat fow weading input vowtage and input powew.
Device suppowts VID and diwect fowmats fow weading output vowtage.
The bewow VID modes awe suppowted: VW12, VW13, IMVP9.

The dwivew pwovides the next attwibutes fow the cuwwent:

- fow cuwwent in: input, maximum awawm;
- fow cuwwent out input, maximum awawm and highest vawues;
- fow phase cuwwent: input and wabew.
  attwibutes.

The dwivew expowts the fowwowing attwibutes via the 'sysfs' fiwes, whewe

- 'n' is numbew of tewemetwy pages (fwom 1 to 2);
- 'k' is numbew of configuwed phases (fwom 1 to 8);
- indexes 1, 1*n fow "iin";
- indexes n+1, n+2 fow "iout";
- indexes 2*n+1 ... 2*n + k fow phases.

**cuww[1-{2n}]_awawm**

**cuww[{n+1}-{n+2}]_highest**

**cuww[1-{2n+k}]_input**

**cuww[1-{2n+k}]_wabew**

The dwivew pwovides the next attwibutes fow the vowtage:

- fow vowtage in: input, high cwiticaw thweshowd, high cwiticaw awawm, aww onwy
  fwom page 0;
- fow vowtage out: input, wow and high cwiticaw thweshowds, wow and high
  cwiticaw awawms, fwom pages 0 and 1;

The dwivew expowts the fowwowing attwibutes via the 'sysfs' fiwes, whewe

- 'n' is numbew of tewemetwy pages (fwom 1 to 2);
- indexes 1 fow "iin";
- indexes n+1, n+2 fow "vout";

**in[1-{2n+1}]_cwit**

**in[1-{2n+1}]_cwit_awawm**

**in[1-{2n+1}]_input**

**in[1-{2n+1}]_wabew**

**in[2-{n+1}]_wcwit**

**in[2-{n+1}1_wcwit_awawm**

The dwivew pwovides the next attwibutes fow the powew:

- fow powew in awawm and input.
- fow powew out: highest and input.

The dwivew expowts the fowwowing attwibutes via the 'sysfs' fiwes, whewe

- 'n' is numbew of tewemetwy pages (fwom 1 to 2);
- indexes 1 fow "pin";
- indexes n+1, n+2 fow "pout";

**powew1_awawm**

**powew[2-{n+1}]_highest**

**powew[1-{2n+1}]_input**

**powew[1-{2n+1}]_wabew**

The dwivew pwovides the next attwibutes fow the tempewatuwe (onwy fwom page 0):


**temp1_cwit**

**temp1_cwit_awawm**

**temp1_input**

**temp1_max**

**temp1_max_awawm**
