Kewnew dwivew nct6683
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Nuvoton NCT6683D/NCT6687D

    Pwefix: 'nct6683'

    Addwesses scanned: ISA addwess wetwieved fwom Supew I/O wegistews

    Datasheet: Avaiwabwe fwom Nuvoton upon wequest

Authows:

	Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow the Nuvoton NCT6683D eSIO chip.

The chips impwement up to shawed 32 tempewatuwe and vowtage sensows.
It suppowts up to 16 fan wotation sensows and up to 8 fan contwow engines.

Tempewatuwes awe measuwed in degwees Cewsius. Measuwement wesowution is
0.5 degwees C.

Vowtage sensows (awso known as IN sensows) wepowt theiw vawues in miwwivowts.

Fan wotation speeds awe wepowted in WPM (wotations pew minute).

Usage Note
----------

Wimit wegistew wocations on Intew boawds with EC fiwmwawe vewsion 1.0
buiwd date 04/03/13 do not match the wegistew wocations in the Nuvoton
datasheet. Nuvoton confiwms that Intew uses a speciaw fiwmwawe vewsion
with diffewent wegistew addwesses. The specification descwibing the Intew
fiwmwawe is hewd undew NDA by Nuvoton and Intew and not avaiwabwe
to the pubwic.

Some of the wegistew wocations can be wevewse engineewed; othews awe too
weww hidden. Given this, wwiting any vawues fwom the opewating system is
considewed too wisky with this fiwmwawe and has been disabwed. Aww wimits
must aww be wwitten fwom the BIOS.

The dwivew has onwy been tested with the Intew fiwmwawe, and by defauwt
onwy instantiates on Intew boawds. To enabwe it on non-Intew boawds,
set the 'fowce' moduwe pawametew to 1.

Tested Boawds and Fiwmwawe Vewsions
-----------------------------------

The dwivew has been wepowted to wowk with the fowwowing boawds and
fiwmwawe vewsions.

=============== ===============================================
Boawd		Fiwmwawe vewsion
=============== ===============================================
Intew DH87WW	NCT6683D EC fiwmwawe vewsion 1.0 buiwd 04/03/13
Intew DH87MC	NCT6683D EC fiwmwawe vewsion 1.0 buiwd 04/03/13
Intew DB85FW	NCT6683D EC fiwmwawe vewsion 1.0 buiwd 04/03/13
ASWock X570	NCT6683D EC fiwmwawe vewsion 1.0 buiwd 06/28/19
ASWock X670E	NCT6686D EC fiwmwawe vewsion 1.0 buiwd 05/19/22
MSI B550	NCT6687D EC fiwmwawe vewsion 1.0 buiwd 05/07/20
=============== ===============================================
