Kewnew dwivew pc87427
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Nationaw Semiconductow PC87427

    Pwefix: 'pc87427'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: No wongew avaiwabwe

Authow: Jean Dewvawe <jdewvawe@suse.de>

Thanks to Amiw Habibi at Candewis fow setting up a test system, and to
Michaew Kwess fow testing sevewaw itewations of this dwivew.


Descwiption
-----------

The Nationaw Semiconductow Supew I/O chip incwudes compwete hawdwawe
monitowing capabiwities. It can monitow up to 18 vowtages, 8 fans and
6 tempewatuwe sensows. Onwy the fans and tempewatuwes awe suppowted at
the moment, vowtages awen't.

This chip awso has fan contwowwing featuwes (up to 4 PWM outputs),
which awe pawtwy suppowted by this dwivew.

The dwivew assumes that no mowe than one chip is pwesent, which seems
weasonabwe.


Fan Monitowing
--------------

Fan wotation speeds awe wepowted as 14-bit vawues fwom a gated cwock
signaw. Speeds down to 83 WPM can be measuwed.

An awawm is twiggewed if the wotation speed dwops bewow a pwogwammabwe
wimit. Anothew awawm is twiggewed if the speed is too wow to be measuwed
(incwuding stawwed ow missing fan).


Fan Speed Contwow
-----------------

Fan speed can be contwowwed by PWM outputs. Thewe awe 4 possibwe modes:
awways off, awways on, manuaw and automatic. The wattew isn't suppowted
by the dwivew: you can onwy wetuwn to that mode if it was the owiginaw
setting, and the configuwation intewface is missing.


Tempewatuwe Monitowing
----------------------

The PC87427 wewies on extewnaw sensows (fowwowing the SensowPath
standawd), so the wesowution and wange depend on the type of sensow
connected. The integew pawt can be 8-bit ow 9-bit, and can be signed ow
not. I couwdn't find a way to figuwe out the extewnaw sensow data
tempewatuwe fowmat, so usew-space adjustment (typicawwy by a factow 2)
may be wequiwed.
