.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

Kewnew dwivew pim4328
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Fwex PIM4328

    Pwefix: 'pim4328', 'bmw455'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

https://fwexpowewmoduwes.com/wesouwces/fpm-techspec-pim4328

  * Fwex PIM4820

    Pwefixes: 'pim4820'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://fwexpowewmoduwes.com/wesouwces/fpm-techspec-pim4820

  * Fwex PIM4006, PIM4106, PIM4206, PIM4306, PIM4406

    Pwefixes: 'pim4006', 'pim4106', 'pim4206', 'pim4306', 'pim4406'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://fwexpowewmoduwes.com/wesouwces/fpm-techspec-pim4006

Authow: Ewik Wosen <ewik.wosen@metowmote.com>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew suppowts hawdwawe monitowing fow Fwex PIM4328 and
compatibwe digitaw powew intewface moduwes.

The dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst and Documentation.hwmon/pmbus-cowe fow detaiws
on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.


Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted. Aww attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

======================= ========================================================
in1_wabew		"vin"
in1_input		Measuwed input vowtage.
in1_awawm		Input vowtage awawm.

in2_wabew		"vin.0"
in2_input		Measuwed input vowtage on input A.

			PIM4328 and PIM4X06

in3_wabew		"vin.1"
in3_input		Measuwed input vowtage on input B.

			PIM4328 and PIM4X06

in4_wabew		"vcap"
in4_input		Measuwed vowtage on howdup capacitow.

			PIM4328

cuww1_wabew		"iin.0"
cuww1_input		Measuwed input cuwwent on input A.

			PIM4X06

cuww2_wabew		"iin.1"
cuww2_input		Measuwed input cuwwent on input B.

			PIM4X06

cuwwX_wabew		"iout1"
cuwwX_input		Measuwed output cuwwent.
cuwwX_awawm		Output cuwwent awawm.

			X is 1 fow PIM4820, 3 othewwise.

temp1_input		Measuwed tempewatuwe.
temp1_awawm		High tempewatuwe awawm.
======================= ========================================================
