Kewnew dwivew sch5627
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * SMSC SCH5627

    Pwefix: 'sch5627'

    Addwesses scanned: none, addwess wead fwom Supew I/O config space

    Datasheet: Appwication Note avaiwabwe upon wequest

Authow: Hans de Goede <hdegoede@wedhat.com>


Descwiption
-----------

SMSC SCH5627 Supew I/O chips incwude compwete hawdwawe monitowing
capabiwities. They can monitow up to 5 vowtages, 4 fans and 8 tempewatuwes.

In addition, the SCH5627 expowts data descwibing which tempewatuwe sensows
affect the speed of each fan. Setting pwmX_auto_channews_temp to 0 fowces
the cowwesponding fan to fuww speed untiw anothew vawue is wwitten.

The SMSC SCH5627 hawdwawe monitowing pawt awso contains an integwated
watchdog. In owdew fow this watchdog to function some mothewboawd specific
initiawization most be done by the BIOS, so if the watchdog is not enabwed
by the BIOS the sch5627 dwivew wiww not wegistew a watchdog device.

The hawdwawe monitowing pawt of the SMSC SCH5627 is accessed by tawking
thwough an embedded micwocontwowwew. An appwication note descwibing the
pwotocow fow communicating with the micwocontwowwew is avaiwabwe upon
wequest. Pwease maiw me if you want a copy.


Contwowwing fan speed
---------------------

The SCH5627 awwows fow pawtiawwy contwowwing the fan speed. If a tempewatuwe
channew excedes tempX_max, aww fans awe fowced to maximum speed. The same is not
twue fow tempX_cwit, pwesumabwy some othew measuwes to coow down the system awe
take in this case.
In which way the vawue of fanX_min affects the fan speed is cuwwentwy unknown.
