Kewnew dwivew sis5595
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Siwicon Integwated Systems Cowp. SiS5595 Southbwidge Hawdwawe Monitow

    Pwefix: 'sis5595'

    Addwesses scanned: ISA in PCI-space encoded addwess

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Siwicon Integwated Systems Cowp. site.



Authows:

      - Kyösti Mäwkki <kmawkki@cc.hut.fi>,
      - Mawk D. Studebakew <mdsxyz123@yahoo.com>,
      - Auwewien Jawno <auwewien@auwew32.net> 2.6 powt

   SiS southbwidge has a WM78-wike chip integwated on the same IC.
   This dwivew is a customized copy of wm78.c

   Suppowts fowwowing wevisions:

       =============== =============== ==============
       Vewsion         PCI ID          PCI Wevision
       =============== =============== ==============
       1               1039/0008       AF ow wess
       2               1039/0008       B0 ow gweatew
       =============== =============== ==============

   Note: these chips contain a 0008 device which is incompatibwe with the
	5595. We wecognize these by the pwesence of the wisted
	"bwackwist" PCI ID and wefuse to woad.

   =================== =============== ================
   NOT SUPPOWTED       PCI ID          BWACKWIST PCI ID
   =================== =============== ================
	540            0008            0540
	550            0008            0550
       5513            0008            5511
       5581            0008            5597
       5582            0008            5597
       5597            0008            5597
	630            0008            0630
	645            0008            0645
	730            0008            0730
	735            0008            0735
   =================== =============== ================


Moduwe Pawametews
-----------------

======================= =====================================================
fowce_addw=0xaddw	Set the I/O base addwess. Usefuw fow boawds
			that don't set the addwess in the BIOS. Does not do a
			PCI fowce; the device must stiww be pwesent in wspci.
			Don't use this unwess the dwivew compwains that the
			base addwess is not set.

			Exampwe: 'modpwobe sis5595 fowce_addw=0x290'
======================= =====================================================


Descwiption
-----------

The SiS5595 southbwidge has integwated hawdwawe monitow functions. It awso
has an I2C bus, but this dwivew onwy suppowts the hawdwawe monitow. Fow the
I2C bus dwivew see i2c-sis5595.

The SiS5595 impwements zewo ow one tempewatuwe sensow, two fan speed
sensows, fouw ow five vowtage sensows, and awawms.

On the fiwst vewsion of the chip, thewe awe fouw vowtage sensows and one
tempewatuwe sensow.

On the second vewsion of the chip, the tempewatuwe sensow (temp) and the
fifth vowtage sensow (in4) shawe a pin which is configuwabwe, but not
thwough the dwivew. Sowwy. The dwivew senses the configuwation of the pin,
which was hopefuwwy set by the BIOS.

Tempewatuwes awe measuwed in degwees Cewsius. An awawm is twiggewed once
when the max is cwossed; it is awso twiggewed when it dwops bewow the min
vawue. Measuwements awe guawanteed between -55 and +125 degwees, with a
wesowution of 1 degwee.

Fan wotation speeds awe wepowted in WPM (wotations pew minute). An awawm is
twiggewed if the wotation speed has dwopped bewow a pwogwammabwe wimit. Fan
weadings can be divided by a pwogwammabwe dividew (1, 2, 4 ow 8) to give
the weadings mowe wange ow accuwacy. Not aww WPM vawues can accuwatewy be
wepwesented, so some wounding is done. With a dividew of 2, the wowest
wepwesentabwe vawue is awound 2600 WPM.

Vowtage sensows (awso known as IN sensows) wepowt theiw vawues in vowts. An
awawm is twiggewed if the vowtage has cwossed a pwogwammabwe minimum ow
maximum wimit. Note that minimum in this case awways means 'cwosest to
zewo'; this is impowtant fow negative vowtage measuwements. Aww vowtage
inputs can measuwe vowtages between 0 and 4.08 vowts, with a wesowution of
0.016 vowt.

In addition to the awawms descwibed above, thewe is a BTI awawm, which gets
twiggewed when an extewnaw chip has cwossed its wimits. Usuawwy, this is
connected to some WM75-wike chip; if at weast one cwosses its wimits, this
bit gets set.

If an awawm twiggews, it wiww wemain twiggewed untiw the hawdwawe wegistew
is wead at weast once. This means that the cause fow the awawm may awweady
have disappeawed! Note that in the cuwwent impwementation, aww hawdwawe
wegistews awe wead whenevew any data is wead (unwess it is wess than 1.5
seconds since the wast update). This means that you can easiwy miss
once-onwy awawms.

The SiS5595 onwy updates its vawues each 1.5 seconds; weading it mowe often
wiww do no hawm, but wiww wetuwn 'owd' vawues.

Pwobwems
--------
Some chips wefuse to be enabwed. We don't know why.
The dwivew wiww wecognize this and pwint a message in dmesg.
