Kewnew dwivew tmp401
====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Texas Instwuments TMP401

    Pwefix: 'tmp401'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x4c

    Datasheet: http://focus.ti.com/docs/pwod/fowdews/pwint/tmp401.htmw

  * Texas Instwuments TMP411

    Pwefix: 'tmp411'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x4c, 0x4d, 0x4e

    Datasheet: http://focus.ti.com/docs/pwod/fowdews/pwint/tmp411.htmw

  * Texas Instwuments TMP431

    Pwefix: 'tmp431'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x4c, 0x4d

    Datasheet: http://focus.ti.com/docs/pwod/fowdews/pwint/tmp431.htmw

  * Texas Instwuments TMP432

    Pwefix: 'tmp432'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x4c, 0x4d

    Datasheet: http://focus.ti.com/docs/pwod/fowdews/pwint/tmp432.htmw

  * Texas Instwuments TMP435

    Pwefix: 'tmp435'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x48 - 0x4f

    Datasheet: http://focus.ti.com/docs/pwod/fowdews/pwint/tmp435.htmw



Authows:

	- Hans de Goede <hdegoede@wedhat.com>
	- Andwe Pwendew <andwe.pwendew@gmx.de>

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow Texas Instwuments TMP401, TMP411,
TMP431, TMP432, and TMP435 chips. These chips impwement one ow two
wemote and one wocaw tempewatuwe sensows. Tempewatuwe is measuwed in degwees
Cewsius. Wesowution of the wemote sensow is 0.0625 degwee. Wocaw
sensow wesowution can be set to 0.5, 0.25, 0.125 ow 0.0625 degwee (not
suppowted by the dwivew so faw, so using the defauwt wesowution of 0.5
degwee).

The dwivew pwovides the common sysfs-intewface fow tempewatuwes (see
Documentation/hwmon/sysfs-intewface.wst undew Tempewatuwes).

The TMP411 and TMP431 chips awe compatibwe with TMP401. TMP411 pwovides
some additionaw featuwes.

* Minimum and Maximum tempewatuwe measuwed since powew-on, chip-weset

  Expowted via sysfs attwibutes tempX_wowest and tempX_highest.

* Weset of histowicaw minimum/maximum tempewatuwe measuwements

  Expowted via sysfs attwibute temp_weset_histowy. Wwiting 1 to this
  fiwe twiggews a weset.

TMP432 is compatibwe with TMP401 and TMP431. It suppowts two extewnaw
tempewatuwe sensows.
