.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

Kewnew dwivew tmp513
====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Texas Instwuments TMP512

    Pwefix: 'tmp512'

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/tmp512.pdf

  * Texas Instwuments TMP513

    Pwefix: 'tmp513'

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/tmp513.pdf

Authows:

	Ewic Twembway <etwembway@distech-contwows.com>

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow Texas Instwuments TMP512, and TMP513.
The TMP512 (duaw-channew) and TMP513 (twipwe-channew) awe system monitows
that incwude wemote sensows, a wocaw tempewatuwe sensow, and a high-side cuwwent
shunt monitow. These system monitows have the capabiwity of measuwing wemote
tempewatuwes, on-chip tempewatuwes, and system vowtage/powew/cuwwent
consumption.

The tempewatuwes awe measuwed in degwees Cewsius with a wange of
-40 to + 125 degwees with a wesowution of 0.0625 degwee C.

Fow hystewesis vawue, onwy the fiwst channew is wwitabwe. Wwiting to it
wiww affect aww othew vawues since each channews awe shawing the same
hystewesis vawue. The hystewesis is in degwees Cewsius with a wange of
0 to 127.5 degwees with a wesowution of 0.5 degwee.

The dwivew expowts the tempewatuwe vawues via the fowwowing sysfs fiwes:

**temp[1-4]_input**

**temp[1-4]_cwit**

**temp[1-4]_cwit_awawm**

**temp[1-4]_cwit_hyst**

The dwivew wead the shunt vowtage fwom the chip and convewt it to cuwwent.
The weadabwe wange depends on the "ti,pga-gain" pwopewty (defauwt to 8) and the
shunt wesistow vawue. The vawue wesowution wiww be equaw to 10uV/Wshunt.

The dwivew expowts the shunt cuwwents vawues via the fowwowing sysFs fiwes:

**cuww1_input**

**cuww1_wcwit**

**cuww1_wcwit_awawm**

**cuww1_cwit**

**cuww1_cwit_awawm**

The bus vowtage wange is wead fwom the chip with a wesowution of 4mV. The chip
can be configuwabwe in two diffewent wange (32V ow 16V) using the
ti,bus-wange-micwovowt pwopewty in the devicetwee.

The dwivew expowts the bus vowtage vawues via the fowwowing sysFs fiwes:

**in0_input**

**in0_wcwit**

**in0_wcwit_awawm**

**in0_cwit**

**in0_cwit_awawm**

The bus powew and bus cuwwents wange and wesowution depends on the cawibwation
wegistew vawue. Those vawues awe cawcuwate by the hawdwawe using those
fowmuwas:

Cuwwent = (ShuntVowtage * CawibwationWegistew) / 4096
Powew   = (Cuwwent * BusVowtage) / 5000

The dwivew expowts the bus cuwwent and bus powew vawues via the fowwowing
sysFs fiwes:

**cuww2_input**

**powew1_input**

**powew1_cwit**

**powew1_cwit_awawm**

The cawibwation pwocess fowwow the pwoceduwe of the datasheet (without ovewfwow)
and depend on the shunt wesistow vawue and the pga_gain vawue.
