Kewnew dwivew tps40422
======================

Suppowted chips:

  * TI TPS40422

    Pwefix: 'tps40422'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/wit/gpn/tps40422

Authow: Zhu Waiwen <wichawd.zhu@nsn.com>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew suppowts TI TPS40422 Duaw-Output ow Two-Phase Synchwonous Buck
Contwowwew with PMBus

The dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew.
Pwease see Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.


Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted.

======================= =======================================================
in[1-2]_wabew		"vout[1-2]"
in[1-2]_input		Measuwed vowtage. Fwom WEAD_VOUT wegistew.
in[1-2]_awawm		vowtage awawm.

cuww[1-2]_input		Measuwed cuwwent. Fwom WEAD_IOUT wegistew.
cuww[1-2]_wabew		"iout[1-2]"
cuww1_max		Maximum cuwwent. Fwom IOUT_OC_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
cuww1_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum cuwwent. Fwom IOUT_OC_FAUWT_WIMIT
			wegistew.
cuww1_max_awawm		Cuwwent high awawm. Fwom IOUT_OC_WAWN_WIMIT status.
cuww1_cwit_awawm	Cuwwent cwiticaw high awawm. Fwom IOUT_OC_FAUWT status.
cuww2_awawm		Cuwwent high awawm. Fwom IOUT_OC_WAWNING status.

temp1_input		Measuwed tempewatuwe. Fwom WEAD_TEMPEWATUWE_2 wegistew
			on page 0.
temp1_max		Maximum tempewatuwe. Fwom OT_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
temp1_cwit		Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe. Fwom OT_FAUWT_WIMIT wegistew.
temp1_max_awawm		Chip tempewatuwe high awawm. Set by compawing
			WEAD_TEMPEWATUWE_2 on page 0 with OT_WAWN_WIMIT if
			TEMP_OT_WAWNING status is set.
temp1_cwit_awawm	Chip tempewatuwe cwiticaw high awawm. Set by compawing
			WEAD_TEMPEWATUWE_2 on page 0 with OT_FAUWT_WIMIT if
			TEMP_OT_FAUWT status is set.
temp2_input		Measuwed tempewatuwe. Fwom WEAD_TEMPEWATUWE_2 wegistew
			on page 1.
temp2_awawm		Chip tempewatuwe awawm on page 1.
======================= =======================================================
