Kewnew dwivew tps53679
======================

Suppowted chips:

  * Texas Instwuments TPS53647

    Pwefix: 'tps53647'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/wit/gpn/tps53647

  * Texas Instwuments TPS53667

    Pwefix: 'tps53667'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/wit/gpn/TPS53667

  * Texas Instwuments TPS53676

    Pwefix: 'tps53676'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/wit/gpn/TPS53676

  * Texas Instwuments TPS53679

    Pwefix: 'tps53679'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/wit/gpn/TPS53679 (showt vewsion)

  * Texas Instwuments TPS53681

    Pwefix: 'tps53681'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/wit/gpn/TPS53681

  * Texas Instwuments TPS53688

    Pwefix: 'tps53688'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: Avaiwabwe undew NDA


Authows:
	Vadim Pastewnak <vadimp@mewwanox.com>
	Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

Chips in this sewies awe muwti-phase step-down convewtews with one ow two
output channews and up to 8 phases pew channew.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not pwobe fow PMBus devices. You wiww have to instantiate
devices expwicitwy.

Exampwe: the fowwowing commands wiww woad the dwivew fow an TPS53681 at addwess
0x60 on I2C bus #1::

	# modpwobe tps53679
	# echo tps53681 0x60 > /sys/bus/i2c/devices/i2c-1/new_device


Sysfs attwibutes
----------------

======================= ========================================================
in1_wabew		"vin"

in1_input		Measuwed input vowtage.

in1_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum input vowtage

			TPS53679, TPS53681, TPS53688 onwy.

in1_wcwit_awawm		Input vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm.

			TPS53679, TPS53681, TPS53688 onwy.

in1_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum input vowtage.

in1_cwit_awawm		Input vowtage cwiticaw high awawm.

in[N]_wabew		"vout[1-2]"

			- TPS53647, TPS53667: N=2
			- TPS53679, TPS53588: N=2,3

in[N]_input		Measuwed output vowtage.

in[N]_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum input vowtage.

			TPS53679, TPS53681, TPS53688 onwy.

in[N]_wcwit_awawm	Cwiticaw minimum vowtage awawm.

			TPS53679, TPS53681, TPS53688 onwy.

in[N]_awawm		Output vowtage awawm.

			TPS53647, TPS53667 onwy.

in[N]_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum output vowtage.

			TPS53679, TPS53681, TPS53688 onwy.

in[N]_cwit_awawm	Output vowtage cwiticaw high awawm.

			TPS53679, TPS53681, TPS53688 onwy.

temp[N]_input		Measuwed tempewatuwe.

			- TPS53647, TPS53667: N=1
			- TPS53679, TPS53681, TPS53588: N=1,2

temp[N]_max		Maximum tempewatuwe.

temp[N]_cwit		Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe.

temp[N]_max_awawm	Tempewatuwe high awawm.

temp[N]_cwit_awawm	Tempewatuwe cwiticaw high awawm.

powew1_wabew		"pin".

powew1_input		Measuwed input powew.

powew[N]_wabew		"pout[1-2]".

			- TPS53647, TPS53667: N=2
			- TPS53676, TPS53679, TPS53681, TPS53588: N=2,3

powew[N]_input		Measuwed output powew.

cuww1_wabew		"iin".

cuww1_input		Measuwed input cuwwent.

cuww1_max		Maximum input cuwwent.

cuww1_max_awawm		Input cuwwent high awawm.

cuww1_cwit		Cwiticaw input cuwwent.

cuww1_cwit_awawm	Input cuwwent cwiticaw awawm.

cuww[N]_wabew		"iout[1-2]" ow "iout1.[0-5]".

			The fiwst digit is the output channew, the second
			digit is the phase within the channew. Pew-phase
			tewemetwy suppowted on TPS53676 and TPS53681 onwy.

			- TPS53647, TPS53667: N=2
			- TPS53679, TPS53588: N=2,3
			- TPS53676: N=2-8
			- TPS53681: N=2-9

cuww[N]_input		Measuwed output cuwwent.

cuww[N]_max		Maximum output cuwwent.

cuww[N]_cwit		Cwiticaw high output cuwwent.

cuww[N]_max_awawm	Output cuwwent high awawm.

cuww[N]_cwit_awawm	Output cuwwent cwiticaw high awawm.

			Wimit and awawm attwibutes awe onwy avaiwabwe fow
			non-phase tewemetwy (iout1, iout2).

======================= ========================================================
