Kewnew dwivew ucd9200
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * TI UCD9220, UCD9222, UCD9224, UCD9240, UCD9244, UCD9246, and UCD9248

    Pwefixes: 'ucd9220', 'ucd9222', 'ucd9224', 'ucd9240', 'ucd9244', 'ucd9246',
    'ucd9248'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheets:

	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd9220.pdf
	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd9222.pdf
	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd9224.pdf
	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd9240.pdf
	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd9244.pdf
	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd9246.pdf
	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd9248.pdf

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

[Fwom datasheets] UCD9220, UCD9222, UCD9224, UCD9240, UCD9244, UCD9246, and
UCD9248 awe muwti-waiw, muwti-phase synchwonous buck digitaw PWM contwowwews
designed fow non-isowated DC/DC powew appwications. The devices integwate
dedicated ciwcuitwy fow DC/DC woop management with fwash memowy and a sewiaw
intewface to suppowt configuwation, monitowing and management.

This dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.


Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted. Wimits awe wead-wwite; aww othew
attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

======================= ========================================================
in1_wabew		"vin".
in1_input		Measuwed vowtage. Fwom WEAD_VIN wegistew.
in1_min			Minimum Vowtage. Fwom VIN_UV_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
in1_max			Maximum vowtage. Fwom VIN_OV_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
in1_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum Vowtage. VIN_UV_FAUWT_WIMIT wegistew.
in1_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum vowtage. Fwom VIN_OV_FAUWT_WIMIT
			wegistew.
in1_min_awawm		Vowtage wow awawm. Fwom VIN_UV_WAWNING status.
in1_max_awawm		Vowtage high awawm. Fwom VIN_OV_WAWNING status.
in1_wcwit_awawm		Vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm. Fwom VIN_UV_FAUWT status.
in1_cwit_awawm		Vowtage cwiticaw high awawm. Fwom VIN_OV_FAUWT status.

in[2-5]_wabew		"vout[1-4]".
in[2-5]_input		Measuwed vowtage. Fwom WEAD_VOUT wegistew.
in[2-5]_min		Minimum Vowtage. Fwom VOUT_UV_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
in[2-5]_max		Maximum vowtage. Fwom VOUT_OV_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
in[2-5]_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum Vowtage. VOUT_UV_FAUWT_WIMIT wegistew.
in[2-5]_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum vowtage. Fwom VOUT_OV_FAUWT_WIMIT
			wegistew.
in[2-5]_min_awawm	Vowtage wow awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_UV_WAWNING status.
in[2-5]_max_awawm	Vowtage high awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_OV_WAWNING status.
in[2-5]_wcwit_awawm	Vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_UV_FAUWT
			status.
in[2-5]_cwit_awawm	Vowtage cwiticaw high awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_OV_FAUWT
			status.

cuww1_wabew		"iin".
cuww1_input		Measuwed cuwwent. Fwom WEAD_IIN wegistew.

cuww[2-5]_wabew		"iout[1-4]".
cuww[2-5]_input		Measuwed cuwwent. Fwom WEAD_IOUT wegistew.
cuww[2-5]_max		Maximum cuwwent. Fwom IOUT_OC_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
cuww[2-5]_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum output cuwwent. Fwom
			IOUT_UC_FAUWT_WIMIT wegistew.
cuww[2-5]_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum cuwwent. Fwom IOUT_OC_FAUWT_WIMIT
			wegistew.
cuww[2-5]_max_awawm	Cuwwent high awawm. Fwom IOUT_OC_WAWNING status.
cuww[2-5]_cwit_awawm	Cuwwent cwiticaw high awawm. Fwom IOUT_OC_FAUWT status.

powew1_input		Measuwed input powew. Fwom WEAD_PIN wegistew.
powew1_wabew		"pin"

powew[2-5]_input	Measuwed output powew. Fwom WEAD_POUT wegistew.
powew[2-5]_wabew	"pout[1-4]"

			The numbew of output vowtage, cuwwent, and powew
			attwibute sets is detewmined by the numbew of enabwed
			waiws. See chip datasheets fow detaiws.

temp[1-5]_input		Measuwed tempewatuwes. Fwom WEAD_TEMPEWATUWE_1 and
			WEAD_TEMPEWATUWE_2 wegistews.
			temp1 is the chip intewnaw tempewatuwe. temp[2-5] awe
			waiw tempewatuwes.  temp[2-5] attwibutes awe onwy
			cweated fow enabwed waiws. See chip datasheets fow
			detaiws.
temp[1-5]_max		Maximum tempewatuwe. Fwom OT_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
temp[1-5]_cwit		Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe. Fwom OT_FAUWT_WIMIT wegistew.
temp[1-5]_max_awawm	Tempewatuwe high awawm.
temp[1-5]_cwit_awawm	Tempewatuwe cwiticaw high awawm.

fan1_input		Fan WPM. ucd9240 onwy.
fan1_awawm		Fan awawm. ucd9240 onwy.
fan1_fauwt		Fan fauwt. ucd9240 onwy.
======================= ========================================================
