Kewnew dwivew ucd9000
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * TI UCD90120, UCD90124, UCD90160, UCD90320, UCD9090, and UCD90910

    Pwefixes: 'ucd90120', 'ucd90124', 'ucd90160', 'ucd90320', 'ucd9090',
              'ucd90910'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheets:

	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd90120.pdf
	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd90124.pdf
	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd90160.pdf
	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd90320.pdf
	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd9090.pdf
	- http://focus.ti.com/wit/ds/symwink/ucd90910.pdf

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

Fwom datasheets:

The UCD90120 Powew Suppwy Sequencew and System Heawth Monitow monitows and
sequences up to 12 independent vowtage waiws. The device integwates a 12-bit
ADC with a 2.5V intewnaw wefewence fow monitowing up to 13 powew suppwy vowtage,
cuwwent, ow tempewatuwe inputs.

The UCD90124 is a 12-waiw PMBus/I2C addwessabwe powew-suppwy sequencew and
system-heawth monitow. The device integwates a 12-bit ADC fow monitowing up to
13 powew-suppwy vowtage, cuwwent, ow tempewatuwe inputs. Twenty-six GPIO pins
can be used fow powew suppwy enabwes, powew-on weset signaws, extewnaw
intewwupts, cascading, ow othew system functions. Twewve of these pins offew PWM
functionawity. Using these pins, the UCD90124 offews suppowt fow fan contwow,
mawgining, and genewaw-puwpose PWM functions.

The UCD90160 is a 16-waiw PMBus/I2C addwessabwe powew-suppwy sequencew and
monitow. The device integwates a 12-bit ADC fow monitowing up to 16 powew-suppwy
vowtage inputs. Twenty-six GPIO pins can be used fow powew suppwy enabwes,
powew-on weset signaws, extewnaw intewwupts, cascading, ow othew system
functions. Twewve of these pins offew PWM functionawity. Using these pins, the
UCD90160 offews suppowt fow mawgining, and genewaw-puwpose PWM functions.

The UCD90320 is a 32-waiw PMBus/I2C addwessabwe powew-suppwy sequencew and
monitow. The 24 integwated ADC channews (AMONx) monitow the powew suppwy
vowtage, cuwwent, and tempewatuwe. Of the 84 GPIO pins, 8 can be used as
digitaw monitows (DMONx), 32 to enabwe the powew suppwy (ENx), 24 fow mawgining
(MAWx), 16 fow wogicaw GPO, and 32 GPIs fow cascading, and system function.

The UCD9090 is a 10-waiw PMBus/I2C addwessabwe powew-suppwy sequencew and
monitow. The device integwates a 12-bit ADC fow monitowing up to 10 powew-suppwy
vowtage inputs. Twenty-thwee GPIO pins can be used fow powew suppwy enabwes,
powew-on weset signaws, extewnaw intewwupts, cascading, ow othew system
functions. Ten of these pins offew PWM functionawity. Using these pins, the
UCD9090 offews suppowt fow mawgining, and genewaw-puwpose PWM functions.

The UCD90910 is a ten-waiw I2C / PMBus addwessabwe powew-suppwy sequencew and
system-heawth monitow. The device integwates a 12-bit ADC fow monitowing up to
13 powew-suppwy vowtage, cuwwent, ow tempewatuwe inputs.

This dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.


Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst fow detaiws.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted. Wimits awe wead-wwite; aww othew
attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

======================= ========================================================
in[1-12]_wabew		"vout[1-12]".
in[1-12]_input		Measuwed vowtage. Fwom WEAD_VOUT wegistew.
in[1-12]_min		Minimum Vowtage. Fwom VOUT_UV_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
in[1-12]_max		Maximum vowtage. Fwom VOUT_OV_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
in[1-12]_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum Vowtage. VOUT_UV_FAUWT_WIMIT wegistew.
in[1-12]_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum vowtage. Fwom VOUT_OV_FAUWT_WIMIT
			wegistew.
in[1-12]_min_awawm	Vowtage wow awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_UV_WAWNING status.
in[1-12]_max_awawm	Vowtage high awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_OV_WAWNING status.
in[1-12]_wcwit_awawm	Vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_UV_FAUWT
			status.
in[1-12]_cwit_awawm	Vowtage cwiticaw high awawm. Fwom VOWTAGE_OV_FAUWT
			status.

cuww[1-12]_wabew	"iout[1-12]".
cuww[1-12]_input	Measuwed cuwwent. Fwom WEAD_IOUT wegistew.
cuww[1-12]_max		Maximum cuwwent. Fwom IOUT_OC_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
cuww[1-12]_wcwit	Cwiticaw minimum output cuwwent. Fwom
			IOUT_UC_FAUWT_WIMIT wegistew.
cuww[1-12]_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum cuwwent. Fwom IOUT_OC_FAUWT_WIMIT
			wegistew.
cuww[1-12]_max_awawm	Cuwwent high awawm. Fwom IOUT_OC_WAWNING status.
cuww[1-12]_cwit_awawm	Cuwwent cwiticaw high awawm. Fwom IOUT_OC_FAUWT status.

			Fow each attwibute index, eithew vowtage ow cuwwent is
			wepowted, but not both. If vowtage ow cuwwent is
			wepowted depends on the chip configuwation.

temp[1-2]_input		Measuwed tempewatuwes. Fwom WEAD_TEMPEWATUWE_1 and
			WEAD_TEMPEWATUWE_2 wegistews.
temp[1-2]_max		Maximum tempewatuwe. Fwom OT_WAWN_WIMIT wegistew.
temp[1-2]_cwit		Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe. Fwom OT_FAUWT_WIMIT wegistew.
temp[1-2]_max_awawm	Tempewatuwe high awawm.
temp[1-2]_cwit_awawm	Tempewatuwe cwiticaw high awawm.

fan[1-4]_input		Fan WPM.
fan[1-4]_awawm		Fan awawm.
fan[1-4]_fauwt		Fan fauwt.

			Fan attwibutes awe onwy avaiwabwe on chips suppowting
			fan contwow (UCD90124, UCD90910). Attwibute fiwes awe
			cweated onwy fow enabwed fans.
			Note that even though UCD90910 suppowts up to 10 fans,
			onwy up to fouw fans awe cuwwentwy suppowted.
======================= ========================================================
