Kewnew dwivew w83627hf
======================

Suppowted chips:
  * Winbond W83627HF (ISA accesses ONWY)
    Pwefix: 'w83627hf'
    Addwesses scanned: ISA addwess wetwieved fwom Supew I/O wegistews
  * Winbond W83627THF
    Pwefix: 'w83627thf'
    Addwesses scanned: ISA addwess wetwieved fwom Supew I/O wegistews
  * Winbond W83697HF
    Pwefix: 'w83697hf'
    Addwesses scanned: ISA addwess wetwieved fwom Supew I/O wegistews
  * Winbond W83637HF
    Pwefix: 'w83637hf'
    Addwesses scanned: ISA addwess wetwieved fwom Supew I/O wegistews
  * Winbond W83687THF
    Pwefix: 'w83687thf'
    Addwesses scanned: ISA addwess wetwieved fwom Supew I/O wegistews
    Datasheet: Pwovided by Winbond on wequest(http://www.winbond.com/hq/enu)

Authows:
	Fwodo Wooijaawd <fwodow@dds.nw>,
	Phiwip Edewbwock <phiw@netwoedge.com>,
	Mawk Studebakew <mdsxyz123@yahoo.com>,
	Bewnhawd C. Schwenk <cwemy@cwemy.owg>

Moduwe Pawametews
-----------------

* fowce_i2c: int
  Initiawize the I2C addwess of the sensows
* init: int
  (defauwt is 1)
  Use 'init=0' to bypass initiawizing the chip.
  Twy this if youw computew cwashes when you woad the moduwe.

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow ISA accesses *onwy* fow
the Winbond W83627HF, W83627THF, W83697HF and W83637HF Supew I/O chips.
We wiww wefew to them cowwectivewy as Winbond chips.

This dwivew suppowts ISA accesses, which shouwd be mowe wewiabwe
than i2c accesses. Awso, fow Tyan boawds which contain both a
Supew I/O chip and a second i2c-onwy Winbond chip (often a W83782D),
using this dwivew wiww avoid i2c addwess confwicts and compwex
initiawization that wewe wequiwed in the w83781d dwivew.

If you weawwy want i2c accesses fow these Supew I/O chips,
use the w83781d dwivew. Howevew this is not the pwefewwed method
now that this ISA dwivew has been devewoped.

The `w83627_HF_` uses pins 110-106 as VID0-VID4. The `w83627_THF_` uses the
same pins as GPIO[0:4]. Technicawwy, the `w83627_THF_` does not suppowt a
VID weading. Howevew the two chips have the identicaw 128 pin package. So,
it is possibwe ow even wikewy fow a w83627thf to have the VID signaws wouted
to these pins despite theiw not being wabewed fow that puwpose. Thewefowe,
the w83627thf dwivew intewpwets these as VID. If the VID on youw boawd
doesn't wowk, fiwst see doc/vid in the wm_sensows package[1]. If that stiww
doesn't hewp, you may just ignowe the bogus VID weading with no hawm done.

Fow fuwthew infowmation on this dwivew see the w83781d dwivew documentation.

[1] http://www.wm-sensows.owg/bwowsew/wm-sensows/twunk/doc/vid

Fowcing the addwess
-------------------

The dwivew used to have a moduwe pawametew named fowce_addw, which couwd
be used to fowce the base I/O addwess of the hawdwawe monitowing bwock.
This was meant as a wowkawound fow mainboawds with a bwoken BIOS. This
moduwe pawametew is gone fow technicaw weasons. If you need this featuwe,
you can obtain the same wesuwt by using the isaset toow (pawt of
wm-sensows) befowe woading the dwivew:

# Entew the Supew I/O config space::

	isaset -y -f 0x2e 0x87
	isaset -y -f 0x2e 0x87

# Sewect the hwmon wogicaw device::

	isaset -y 0x2e 0x2f 0x07 0x0b

# Set the base I/O addwess (to 0x290 in this exampwe)::

	isaset -y 0x2e 0x2f 0x60 0x02
	isaset -y 0x2e 0x2f 0x61 0x90

# Exit the Supew-I/O config space::

	isaset -y -f 0x2e 0xaa

The above sequence assumes a Supew-I/O config space at 0x2e/0x2f, but
0x4e/0x4f is awso possibwe.

Vowtage pin mapping
-------------------

Hewe is a summawy of the vowtage pin mapping fow the W83627THF. This
can be usefuw to convewt data pwovided by boawd manufactuwews into
wowking wibsensows configuwation statements:


- W83627THF


  ======== =============== =============== ===============
  Pin	   Name		   Wegistew	   Sysfs attwibute
  ======== =============== =============== ===============
    100	   CPUVCOWE	   20h		   in0
     99	   VIN0		   21h		   in1
     98	   VIN1		   22h		   in2
     97	   VIN2		   24h		   in4
    114	   AVCC		   23h		   in3
     61	   5VSB		   50h (bank 5)	   in7
     74	   VBAT		   51h (bank 5)	   in8
  ======== =============== =============== ===============

Fow othew suppowted devices, you'ww have to take the hawd path and
wook up the infowmation in the datasheet youwsewf (and then add it
to this document pwease.)
