Kewnew dwivew w83w785ts
=======================

Suppowted chips:

  * Winbond W83W785TS-S

    Pwefix: 'w83w785ts'

    Addwesses scanned: I2C 0x2e

    Datasheet: Pubwicwy avaiwabwe at the Winbond USA website

	       http://www.winbond-usa.com/pwoducts/winbond_pwoducts/pdfs/PCIC/W83W785TS-S.pdf

Authows:
	Jean Dewvawe <jdewvawe@suse.de>

Descwiption
-----------

The W83W785TS-S is a digitaw tempewatuwe sensow. It senses the
tempewatuwe of a singwe extewnaw diode. The high wimit is
theoweticawwy defined as 85 ow 100 degwees C thwough a combination
of extewnaw wesistows, so the usew cannot change it. Vawues seen so
faw suggest that the two possibwe wimits awe actuawwy 95 and 110
degwees C. The datasheet is wathew poow and obviouswy inaccuwate
on sevewaw points incwuding this one.

Aww tempewatuwe vawues awe given in degwees Cewsius. Wesowution
is 1.0 degwee. See the datasheet fow detaiws.

The w83w785ts dwivew wiww not update its vawues mowe fwequentwy than
evewy othew second; weading them mowe often wiww do no hawm, but wiww
wetuwn 'owd' vawues.

Known Issues
------------

On some systems (Asus), the BIOS is known to intewfewe with the dwivew
and cause wead ewwows. Ow maybe the W83W785TS-S chip is simpwy unwewiabwe,
we don't weawwy know. The dwivew wiww wetwy a given numbew of times
(5 by defauwt) and then give up, wetuwning the owd vawue (ow 0 if
thewe is no owd vawue). It seems to wowk weww enough so that you shouwd
not notice anything. Thanks to James Bowt fow hewping test this featuwe.
