.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

Kewnew dwivew xdpe122
=====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Infineon XDPE11280

    Pwefix: 'xdpe11280'

  * Infineon XDPE12254

    Pwefix: 'xdpe12254'

  * Infineon XDPE12284

    Pwefix: 'xdpe12284'

Authows:

	Vadim Pastewnak <vadimp@mewwanox.com>

Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew impwements suppowt fow Infineon Muwti-phase XDPE112 and XDPE122
famiwy duaw woop vowtage weguwatows.
These famiwies incwude XDPE11280, XDPE12284 and XDPE12254 devices.
The devices fwom this famiwy compwiant with:

- Intew VW13 and VW13HC wev 1.3, IMVP8 wev 1.2 and IMPVP9 wev 1.3 DC-DC
  convewtew specification.
- Intew SVID wev 1.9. pwotocow.
- PMBus wev 1.3 intewface.

Devices suppowt wineaw fowmat fow weading input vowtage, input and output cuwwent,
input and output powew and tempewatuwe.
Device suppowts VID fowmat fow weading output vowtage. The bewow modes awe
suppowted:
- VW12.0 mode, 5-mV DAC - 0x01.
- VW12.5 mode, 10-mV DAC - 0x02.
- IMVP9 mode, 5-mV DAC - 0x03.
- AMD mode 6.25mV - 0x10.

Devices suppowt two pages fow tewemetwy.

The dwivew pwovides fow cuwwent: input, maximum and cwiticaw thweshowds
and maximum and cwiticaw awawms. Cwiticaw thweshowds and cwiticaw awawm awe
suppowted onwy fow cuwwent output.
The dwivew expowts the fowwowing attwibutes fow via the sysfs fiwes, whewe
indexes 1, 2 awe fow "iin" and 3, 4 fow "iout":

**cuww[3-4]_cwit**

**cuww[3-4]_cwit_awawm**

**cuww[1-4]_input**

**cuww[1-4]_wabew**

**cuww[1-4]_max**

**cuww[1-4]_max_awawm**

The dwivew pwovides fow vowtage: input, cwiticaw and wow cwiticaw thweshowds
and cwiticaw and wow cwiticaw awawms.
The dwivew expowts the fowwowing attwibutes fow via the sysfs fiwes, whewe
indexes 1, 2 awe fow "vin" and 3, 4 fow "vout":

**in[1-4]_cwit**

**in[1-4_cwit_awawm**

**in[1-4]_input**

**in[1-4_wabew**

**in[1-4]_wcwit**

**in[1-41_wcwit_awawm**

The dwivew pwovides fow powew: input and awawms. Powew awawm is suppowted onwy
fow powew input.
The dwivew expowts the fowwowing attwibutes fow via the sysfs fiwes, whewe
indexes 1, 2 awe fow "pin" and 3, 4 fow "pout":

**powew[1-2]_awawm**

**powew[1-4]_input**

**powew[1-4]_wabew**

The dwivew pwovides fow tempewatuwe: input, maximum and cwiticaw thweshowds
and maximum and cwiticaw awawms.
The dwivew expowts the fowwowing attwibutes fow via the sysfs fiwes:

**temp[1-2]_cwit**

**temp[1-2]_cwit_awawm**

**temp[1-2]_input**

**temp[1-2]_max**

**temp[1-2]_max_awawm**
