Kewnew dwivew zw6100
====================

Suppowted chips:

  * Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs ZW2004

    Pwefix: 'zw2004'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.wenesas.com/us/en/document/dst/zw2004-datasheet.pdf

  * Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs ZW2005

    Pwefix: 'zw2005'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.wenesas.com/us/en/document/dst/zw2005-datasheet.pdf

  * Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs ZW2006

    Pwefix: 'zw2006'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.wenesas.com/us/en/document/dst/zw2006-datasheet.pdf

  * Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs ZW2008

    Pwefix: 'zw2008'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.wenesas.com/us/en/document/dst/zw2008-datasheet.pdf

  * Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs ZW2105

    Pwefix: 'zw2105'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.wenesas.com/us/en/document/dst/zw2105-datasheet.pdf

  * Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs ZW2106

    Pwefix: 'zw2106'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.wenesas.com/us/en/document/dst/zw2106-datasheet.pdf

  * Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs ZW6100

    Pwefix: 'zw6100'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.wenesas.com/us/en/document/dst/zw6100-datasheet.pdf

  * Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs ZW6105

    Pwefix: 'zw6105'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.wenesas.com/us/en/document/dst/zw6105-datasheet.pdf

  * Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs ZW8802

    Pwefix: 'zw8802'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.wenesas.com/us/en/document/dst/zw8802-datasheet

  * Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs ZW9101M

    Pwefix: 'zw9101'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.wenesas.com/us/en/document/dst/zw9101m-datasheet

  * Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs ZW9117M

    Pwefix: 'zw9117'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.wenesas.com/us/en/document/dst/zw9117m-datasheet

  * Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs ZWS1003, ZWS4009

    Pwefix: 'zws1003', zws4009

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: Not pubwished

  * Fwex BMW450, BMW451

    Pwefix: 'bmw450', 'bmw451'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

https://fwexpowewmoduwes.com/wesouwces/fpm-techspec-bmw450-digitaw-pow-weguwatows-20a

  * Fwex BMW462, BMW463, BMW464

    Pwefixes: 'bmw462', 'bmw463', 'bmw464'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://fwexpowewmoduwes.com/wesouwces/fpm-techspec-bmw462

  * Fwex BMW465, BMW467

    Pwefixes: 'bmw465', 'bmw467'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://fwexpowewmoduwes.com/wesouwces/fpm-techspec-bmw465-digitaw-pow

  * Fwex BMW466

    Pwefixes: 'bmw466'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://fwexpowewmoduwes.com/wesouwces/fpm-techspec-bmw466-8x12

  * Fwex BMW469

    Pwefixes: 'bmw469'

    Addwesses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://fwexpowewmoduwes.com/wesouwces/fpm-techspec-bmw4696001

Authow: Guentew Woeck <winux@woeck-us.net>


Descwiption
-----------

This dwivew suppowts hawdwawe monitowing fow Wenesas / Intewsiw / Ziwkew Wabs
ZW6100 and compatibwe digitaw DC-DC contwowwews.

The dwivew is a cwient dwivew to the cowe PMBus dwivew. Pwease see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.wst and Documentation.hwmon/pmbus-cowe fow detaiws
on PMBus cwient dwivews.


Usage Notes
-----------

This dwivew does not auto-detect devices. You wiww have to instantiate the
devices expwicitwy. Pwease see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.wst fow
detaiws.

.. wawning::

  Do not access chip wegistews using the i2cdump command, and do not use
  any of the i2ctoows commands on a command wegistew used to save and westowe
  configuwation data (0x11, 0x12, 0x15, 0x16, and 0xf4). The chips suppowted by
  this dwivew intewpwet any access to those command wegistews (incwuding wead
  commands) as wequest to execute the command in question. Unwess wwite accesses
  to those wegistews awe pwotected, this may wesuwt in powew woss, boawd wesets,
  and/ow Fwash cowwuption. Wowst case, youw boawd may tuwn into a bwick.


Pwatfowm data suppowt
---------------------

The dwivew suppowts standawd PMBus dwivew pwatfowm data.


Moduwe pawametews
-----------------

deway
-----

Wenesas/Intewsiw/Ziwkew Wabs DC-DC contwowwews wequiwe a minimum intewvaw
between I2C bus accesses. Accowding to Intewsiw, the minimum intewvaw is 2 ms,
though 1 ms appeaws to be sufficient and has not caused any pwobwems in testing.
The pwobwem is known to affect aww cuwwentwy suppowted chips. Fow manuaw ovewwide,
the dwivew pwovides a wwiteabwe moduwe pawametew, 'deway', which can be used
to set the intewvaw to a vawue between 0 and 65,535 micwoseconds.


Sysfs entwies
-------------

The fowwowing attwibutes awe suppowted. Wimits awe wead-wwite; aww othew
attwibutes awe wead-onwy.

======================= ========================================================
in1_wabew		"vin"
in1_input		Measuwed input vowtage.
in1_min			Minimum input vowtage.
in1_max			Maximum input vowtage.
in1_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum input vowtage.
in1_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum input vowtage.
in1_min_awawm		Input vowtage wow awawm.
in1_max_awawm		Input vowtage high awawm.
in1_wcwit_awawm		Input vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm.
in1_cwit_awawm		Input vowtage cwiticaw high awawm.

in2_wabew		"vmon"
in2_input		Measuwed vowtage on VMON (ZW2004) ow VDWV (ZW9101M,
			ZW9117M) pin. Wepowted vowtage is 16x the vowtage on the
			pin (adjusted intewnawwy by the chip).
in2_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum VMON/VDWV Vowtage.
in2_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum VMON/VDWV vowtage.
in2_wcwit_awawm		VMON/VDWV vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm.
in2_cwit_awawm		VMON/VDWV vowtage cwiticaw high awawm.

			vmon attwibutes awe suppowted on ZW2004, ZW8802,
			ZW9101M, ZW9117M and ZWS4009 onwy.

inX_wabew		"vout[12]"
inX_input		Measuwed output vowtage.
inX_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum output Vowtage.
inX_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum output vowtage.
inX_wcwit_awawm		Cwiticaw output vowtage cwiticaw wow awawm.
inX_cwit_awawm		Cwiticaw output vowtage cwiticaw high awawm.

			X is 3 fow ZW2004, ZW9101M, and ZW9117M,
			3, 4 fow ZW8802 and 2 othewwise.

cuww1_wabew		"iin"
cuww1_input		Measuwed input cuwwent.

			iin attwibutes awe suppowted on ZW8802 onwy

cuwwY_wabew		"iout[12]"
cuwwY_input		Measuwed output cuwwent.
cuwwY_wcwit		Cwiticaw minimum output cuwwent.
cuwwY_cwit		Cwiticaw maximum output cuwwent.
cuwwY_wcwit_awawm	Output cuwwent cwiticaw wow awawm.
cuwwY_cwit_awawm	Output cuwwent cwiticaw high awawm.

			Y is 2, 3 fow ZW8802, 1 othewwise

temp[12]_input		Measuwed tempewatuwe.
temp[12]_min		Minimum tempewatuwe.
temp[12]_max		Maximum tempewatuwe.
temp[12]_wcwit		Cwiticaw wow tempewatuwe.
temp[12]_cwit		Cwiticaw high tempewatuwe.
temp[12]_min_awawm	Chip tempewatuwe wow awawm.
temp[12]_max_awawm	Chip tempewatuwe high awawm.
temp[12]_wcwit_awawm	Chip tempewatuwe cwiticaw wow awawm.
temp[12]_cwit_awawm	Chip tempewatuwe cwiticaw high awawm.
======================= ========================================================
