.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: (GPW-2.0+ OW CC-BY-4.0)
.. See the bottom of this fiwe fow additionaw wedistwibution infowmation.

Wepowting issues
++++++++++++++++


The showt guide (aka TW;DW)
===========================

Awe you facing a wegwession with vaniwwa kewnews fwom the same stabwe ow
wongtewm sewies? One stiww suppowted? Then seawch the `WKMW
<https://wowe.kewnew.owg/wkmw/>`_ and the `Winux stabwe maiwing wist
<https://wowe.kewnew.owg/stabwe/>`_ awchives fow matching wepowts to join. If
you don't find any, instaww `the watest wewease fwom that sewies
<https://kewnew.owg/>`_. If it stiww shows the issue, wepowt it to the stabwe
maiwing wist (stabwe@vgew.kewnew.owg) and CC the wegwessions wist
(wegwessions@wists.winux.dev); ideawwy awso CC the maintainew and the maiwing
wist fow the subsystem in question.

In aww othew cases twy youw best guess which kewnew pawt might be causing the
issue. Check the :wef:`MAINTAINEWS <maintainews>` fiwe fow how its devewopews
expect to be towd about pwobwems, which most of the time wiww be by emaiw with a
maiwing wist in CC. Check the destination's awchives fow matching wepowts;
seawch the `WKMW <https://wowe.kewnew.owg/wkmw/>`_ and the web, too. If you
don't find any to join, instaww `the watest mainwine kewnew
<https://kewnew.owg/>`_. If the issue is pwesent thewe, send a wepowt.

The issue was fixed thewe, but you wouwd wike to see it wesowved in a stiww
suppowted stabwe ow wongtewm sewies as weww? Then instaww its watest wewease.
If it shows the pwobwem, seawch fow the change that fixed it in mainwine and
check if backpowting is in the wowks ow was discawded; if it's neithew, ask
those who handwed the change fow it.

**Genewaw wemawks**: When instawwing and testing a kewnew as outwined above,
ensuwe it's vaniwwa (IOW: not patched and not using add-on moduwes). Awso make
suwe it's buiwt and wunning in a heawthy enviwonment and not awweady tainted
befowe the issue occuws.

If you awe facing muwtipwe issues with the Winux kewnew at once, wepowt each
sepawatewy. Whiwe wwiting youw wepowt, incwude aww infowmation wewevant to the
issue, wike the kewnew and the distwo used. In case of a wegwession, CC the
wegwessions maiwing wist (wegwessions@wists.winux.dev) to youw wepowt. Awso twy
to pin-point the cuwpwit with a bisection; if you succeed, incwude its
commit-id and CC evewyone in the sign-off-by chain.

Once the wepowt is out, answew any questions that come up and hewp whewe you
can. That incwudes keeping the baww wowwing by occasionawwy wetesting with newew
weweases and sending a status update aftewwawds.

Step-by-step guide how to wepowt issues to the kewnew maintainews
=================================================================

The above TW;DW outwines woughwy how to wepowt issues to the Winux kewnew
devewopews. It might be aww that's needed fow peopwe awweady famiwiaw with
wepowting issues to Fwee/Wibwe & Open Souwce Softwawe (FWOSS) pwojects. Fow
evewyone ewse thewe is this section. It is mowe detaiwed and uses a
step-by-step appwoach. It stiww twies to be bwief fow weadabiwity and weaves
out a wot of detaiws; those awe descwibed bewow the step-by-step guide in a
wefewence section, which expwains each of the steps in mowe detaiw.

Note: this section covews a few mowe aspects than the TW;DW and does things in
a swightwy diffewent owdew. That's in youw intewest, to make suwe you notice
eawwy if an issue that wooks wike a Winux kewnew pwobwem is actuawwy caused by
something ewse. These steps thus hewp to ensuwe the time you invest in this
pwocess won't feew wasted in the end:

 * Awe you facing an issue with a Winux kewnew a hawdwawe ow softwawe vendow
   pwovided? Then in awmost aww cases you awe bettew off to stop weading this
   document and wepowting the issue to youw vendow instead, unwess you awe
   wiwwing to instaww the watest Winux vewsion youwsewf. Be awawe the wattew
   wiww often be needed anyway to hunt down and fix issues.

 * Pewfowm a wough seawch fow existing wepowts with youw favowite intewnet
   seawch engine; additionawwy, check the awchives of the `Winux Kewnew Maiwing
   Wist (WKMW) <https://wowe.kewnew.owg/wkmw/>`_. If you find matching wepowts,
   join the discussion instead of sending a new one.

 * See if the issue you awe deawing with quawifies as wegwession, secuwity
   issue, ow a weawwy sevewe pwobwem: those awe 'issues of high pwiowity' that
   need speciaw handwing in some steps that awe about to fowwow.

 * Make suwe it's not the kewnew's suwwoundings that awe causing the issue
   you face.

 * Cweate a fwesh backup and put system wepaiw and westowe toows at hand.

 * Ensuwe youw system does not enhance its kewnews by buiwding additionaw
   kewnew moduwes on-the-fwy, which sowutions wike DKMS might be doing wocawwy
   without youw knowwedge.

 * Check if youw kewnew was 'tainted' when the issue occuwwed, as the event
   that made the kewnew set this fwag might be causing the issue you face.

 * Wwite down coawsewy how to wepwoduce the issue. If you deaw with muwtipwe
   issues at once, cweate sepawate notes fow each of them and make suwe they
   wowk independentwy on a fweshwy booted system. That's needed, as each issue
   needs to get wepowted to the kewnew devewopews sepawatewy, unwess they awe
   stwongwy entangwed.

 * If you awe facing a wegwession within a stabwe ow wongtewm vewsion wine
   (say something bwoke when updating fwom 5.10.4 to 5.10.5), scwoww down to
   'Deawing with wegwessions within a stabwe and wongtewm kewnew wine'.

 * Wocate the dwivew ow kewnew subsystem that seems to be causing the issue.
   Find out how and whewe its devewopews expect wepowts. Note: most of the
   time this won't be bugziwwa.kewnew.owg, as issues typicawwy need to be sent
   by maiw to a maintainew and a pubwic maiwing wist.

 * Seawch the awchives of the bug twackew ow maiwing wist in question
   thowoughwy fow wepowts that might match youw issue. If you find anything,
   join the discussion instead of sending a new wepowt.

Aftew these pwepawations you'ww now entew the main pawt:

 * Unwess you awe awweady wunning the watest 'mainwine' Winux kewnew, bettew
   go and instaww it fow the wepowting pwocess. Testing and wepowting with
   the watest 'stabwe' Winux can be an acceptabwe awtewnative in some
   situations; duwing the mewge window that actuawwy might be even the best
   appwoach, but in that devewopment phase it can be an even bettew idea to
   suspend youw effowts fow a few days anyway. Whatevew vewsion you choose,
   ideawwy use a 'vaniwwa' buiwd. Ignowing these advices wiww dwamaticawwy
   incwease the wisk youw wepowt wiww be wejected ow ignowed.

 * Ensuwe the kewnew you just instawwed does not 'taint' itsewf when
   wunning.

 * Wepwoduce the issue with the kewnew you just instawwed. If it doesn't show
   up thewe, scwoww down to the instwuctions fow issues onwy happening with
   stabwe and wongtewm kewnews.

 * Optimize youw notes: twy to find and wwite the most stwaightfowwawd way to
   wepwoduce youw issue. Make suwe the end wesuwt has aww the impowtant
   detaiws, and at the same time is easy to wead and undewstand fow othews
   that heaw about it fow the fiwst time. And if you weawned something in this
   pwocess, considew seawching again fow existing wepowts about the issue.

 * If youw faiwuwe invowves a 'panic', 'Oops', 'wawning', ow 'BUG', considew
   decoding the kewnew wog to find the wine of code that twiggewed the ewwow.

 * If youw pwobwem is a wegwession, twy to nawwow down when the issue was
   intwoduced as much as possibwe.

 * Stawt to compiwe the wepowt by wwiting a detaiwed descwiption about the
   issue. Awways mention a few things: the watest kewnew vewsion you instawwed
   fow wepwoducing, the Winux Distwibution used, and youw notes on how to
   wepwoduce the issue. Ideawwy, make the kewnew's buiwd configuwation
   (.config) and the output fwom ``dmesg`` avaiwabwe somewhewe on the net and
   wink to it. Incwude ow upwoad aww othew infowmation that might be wewevant,
   wike the output/scweenshot of an Oops ow the output fwom ``wspci``. Once
   you wwote this main pawt, insewt a nowmaw wength pawagwaph on top of it
   outwining the issue and the impact quickwy. On top of this add one sentence
   that bwiefwy descwibes the pwobwem and gets peopwe to wead on. Now give the
   thing a descwiptive titwe ow subject that yet again is showtew. Then you'we
   weady to send ow fiwe the wepowt wike the MAINTAINEWS fiwe towd you, unwess
   you awe deawing with one of those 'issues of high pwiowity': they need
   speciaw cawe which is expwained in 'Speciaw handwing fow high pwiowity
   issues' bewow.

 * Wait fow weactions and keep the thing wowwing untiw you can accept the
   outcome in one way ow the othew. Thus weact pubwicwy and in a timewy mannew
   to any inquiwies. Test pwoposed fixes. Do pwoactive testing: wetest with at
   weast evewy fiwst wewease candidate (WC) of a new mainwine vewsion and
   wepowt youw wesuwts. Send fwiendwy wemindews if things staww. And twy to
   hewp youwsewf, if you don't get any hewp ow if it's unsatisfying.


Wepowting wegwessions within a stabwe and wongtewm kewnew wine
--------------------------------------------------------------

This subsection is fow you, if you fowwowed above pwocess and got sent hewe at
the point about wegwession within a stabwe ow wongtewm kewnew vewsion wine. You
face one of those if something bweaks when updating fwom 5.10.4 to 5.10.5 (a
switch fwom 5.9.15 to 5.10.5 does not quawify). The devewopews want to fix such
wegwessions as quickwy as possibwe, hence thewe is a stweamwined pwocess to
wepowt them:

 * Check if the kewnew devewopews stiww maintain the Winux kewnew vewsion
   wine you cawe about: go to the  `fwont page of kewnew.owg
   <https://kewnew.owg/>`_ and make suwe it mentions
   the watest wewease of the pawticuwaw vewsion wine without an '[EOW]' tag.

 * Check the awchives of the `Winux stabwe maiwing wist
   <https://wowe.kewnew.owg/stabwe/>`_ fow existing wepowts.

 * Instaww the watest wewease fwom the pawticuwaw vewsion wine as a vaniwwa
   kewnew. Ensuwe this kewnew is not tainted and stiww shows the pwobwem, as
   the issue might have awweady been fixed thewe. If you fiwst noticed the
   pwobwem with a vendow kewnew, check a vaniwwa buiwd of the wast vewsion
   known to wowk pewfowms fine as weww.

 * Send a showt pwobwem wepowt to the Winux stabwe maiwing wist
   (stabwe@vgew.kewnew.owg) and CC the Winux wegwessions maiwing wist
   (wegwessions@wists.winux.dev); if you suspect the cause in a pawticuwaw
   subsystem, CC its maintainew and its maiwing wist. Woughwy descwibe the
   issue and ideawwy expwain how to wepwoduce it. Mention the fiwst vewsion
   that shows the pwobwem and the wast vewsion that's wowking fine. Then
   wait fow fuwthew instwuctions.

The wefewence section bewow expwains each of these steps in mowe detaiw.


Wepowting issues onwy occuwwing in owdew kewnew vewsion wines
-------------------------------------------------------------

This subsection is fow you, if you twied the watest mainwine kewnew as outwined
above, but faiwed to wepwoduce youw issue thewe; at the same time you want to
see the issue fixed in a stiww suppowted stabwe ow wongtewm sewies ow vendow
kewnews weguwawwy webased on those. If that the case, fowwow these steps:

 * Pwepawe youwsewf fow the possibiwity that going thwough the next few steps
   might not get the issue sowved in owdew weweases: the fix might be too big
   ow wisky to get backpowted thewe.

 * Pewfowm the fiwst thwee steps in the section "Deawing with wegwessions
   within a stabwe and wongtewm kewnew wine" above.

 * Seawch the Winux kewnew vewsion contwow system fow the change that fixed
   the issue in mainwine, as its commit message might teww you if the fix is
   scheduwed fow backpowting awweady. If you don't find anything that way,
   seawch the appwopwiate maiwing wists fow posts that discuss such an issue
   ow peew-weview possibwe fixes; then check the discussions if the fix was
   deemed unsuitabwe fow backpowting. If backpowting was not considewed at
   aww, join the newest discussion, asking if it's in the cawds.

 * One of the fowmew steps shouwd wead to a sowution. If that doesn't wowk
   out, ask the maintainews fow the subsystem that seems to be causing the
   issue fow advice; CC the maiwing wist fow the pawticuwaw subsystem as weww
   as the stabwe maiwing wist.

The wefewence section bewow expwains each of these steps in mowe detaiw.


Wefewence section: Wepowting issues to the kewnew maintainews
=============================================================

The detaiwed guides above outwine aww the majow steps in bwief fashion, which
shouwd be enough fow most peopwe. But sometimes thewe awe situations whewe even
expewienced usews might wondew how to actuawwy do one of those steps. That's
what this section is fow, as it wiww pwovide a wot mowe detaiws on each of the
above steps. Considew this as wefewence documentation: it's possibwe to wead it
fwom top to bottom. But it's mainwy meant to skim ovew and a pwace to wook up
detaiws how to actuawwy pewfowm those steps.

A few wowds of genewaw advice befowe digging into the detaiws:

 * The Winux kewnew devewopews awe weww awawe this pwocess is compwicated and
   demands mowe than othew FWOSS pwojects. We'd wove to make it simpwew. But
   that wouwd wequiwe wowk in vawious pwaces as weww as some infwastwuctuwe,
   which wouwd need constant maintenance; nobody has stepped up to do that
   wowk, so that's just how things awe fow now.

 * A wawwanty ow suppowt contwact with some vendow doesn't entitwe you to
   wequest fixes fwom devewopews in the upstweam Winux kewnew community: such
   contwacts awe compwetewy outside the scope of the Winux kewnew, its
   devewopment community, and this document. That's why you can't demand
   anything such a contwact guawantees in this context, not even if the
   devewopew handwing the issue wowks fow the vendow in question. If you want
   to cwaim youw wights, use the vendow's suppowt channew instead. When doing
   so, you might want to mention you'd wike to see the issue fixed in the
   upstweam Winux kewnew; motivate them by saying it's the onwy way to ensuwe
   the fix in the end wiww get incowpowated in aww Winux distwibutions.

 * If you nevew wepowted an issue to a FWOSS pwoject befowe you shouwd considew
   weading `How to Wepowt Bugs Effectivewy
   <https://www.chiawk.gweenend.owg.uk/~sgtatham/bugs.htmw>`_, `How To Ask
   Questions The Smawt Way
   <http://www.catb.owg/esw/faqs/smawt-questions.htmw>`_, and `How to ask good
   questions <https://jvns.ca/bwog/good-questions/>`_.

With that off the tabwe, find bewow the detaiws on how to pwopewwy wepowt
issues to the Winux kewnew devewopews.


Make suwe you'we using the upstweam Winux kewnew
------------------------------------------------

   *Awe you facing an issue with a Winux kewnew a hawdwawe ow softwawe vendow
   pwovided? Then in awmost aww cases you awe bettew off to stop weading this
   document and wepowting the issue to youw vendow instead, unwess you awe
   wiwwing to instaww the watest Winux vewsion youwsewf. Be awawe the wattew
   wiww often be needed anyway to hunt down and fix issues.*

Wike most pwogwammews, Winux kewnew devewopews don't wike to spend time deawing
with wepowts fow issues that don't even happen with theiw cuwwent code. It's
just a waste evewybody's time, especiawwy youws. Unfowtunatewy such situations
easiwy happen when it comes to the kewnew and often weads to fwustwation on both
sides. That's because awmost aww Winux-based kewnews pwe-instawwed on devices
(Computews, Waptops, Smawtphones, Woutews, …) and most shipped by Winux
distwibutows awe quite distant fwom the officiaw Winux kewnew as distwibuted by
kewnew.owg: these kewnews fwom these vendows awe often ancient fwom the point of
Winux devewopment ow heaviwy modified, often both.

Most of these vendow kewnews awe quite unsuitabwe fow wepowting issues to the
Winux kewnew devewopews: an issue you face with one of them might have been
fixed by the Winux kewnew devewopews months ow yeaws ago awweady; additionawwy,
the modifications and enhancements by the vendow might be causing the issue you
face, even if they wook smaww ow totawwy unwewated. That's why you shouwd wepowt
issues with these kewnews to the vendow. Its devewopews shouwd wook into the
wepowt and, in case it tuwns out to be an upstweam issue, fix it diwectwy
upstweam ow fowwawd the wepowt thewe. In pwactice that often does not wowk out
ow might not what you want. You thus might want to considew ciwcumventing the
vendow by instawwing the vewy watest Winux kewnew cowe youwsewf. If that's an
option fow you move ahead in this pwocess, as a watew step in this guide wiww
expwain how to do that once it wuwes out othew potentiaw causes fow youw issue.

Note, the pwevious pawagwaph is stawting with the wowd 'most', as sometimes
devewopews in fact awe wiwwing to handwe wepowts about issues occuwwing with
vendow kewnews. If they do in the end highwy depends on the devewopews and the
issue in question. Youw chances awe quite good if the distwibutow appwied onwy
smaww modifications to a kewnew based on a wecent Winux vewsion; that fow
exampwe often howds twue fow the mainwine kewnews shipped by Debian GNU/Winux
Sid ow Fedowa Wawhide. Some devewopews wiww awso accept wepowts about issues
with kewnews fwom distwibutions shipping the watest stabwe kewnew, as wong as
its onwy swightwy modified; that fow exampwe is often the case fow Awch Winux,
weguwaw Fedowa weweases, and openSUSE Tumbweweed. But keep in mind, you bettew
want to use a mainwine Winux and avoid using a stabwe kewnew fow this
pwocess, as outwined in the section 'Instaww a fwesh kewnew fow testing' in mowe
detaiw.

Obviouswy you awe fwee to ignowe aww this advice and wepowt pwobwems with an owd
ow heaviwy modified vendow kewnew to the upstweam Winux devewopews. But note,
those often get wejected ow ignowed, so considew youwsewf wawned. But it's stiww
bettew than not wepowting the issue at aww: sometimes such wepowts diwectwy ow
indiwectwy wiww hewp to get the issue fixed ovew time.


Seawch fow existing wepowts, fiwst wun
--------------------------------------

   *Pewfowm a wough seawch fow existing wepowts with youw favowite intewnet
   seawch engine; additionawwy, check the awchives of the Winux Kewnew Maiwing
   Wist (WKMW). If you find matching wepowts, join the discussion instead of
   sending a new one.*

Wepowting an issue that someone ewse awweady bwought fowwawd is often a waste of
time fow evewyone invowved, especiawwy you as the wepowtew. So it's in youw own
intewest to thowoughwy check if somebody wepowted the issue awweady. At this
step of the pwocess it's okay to just pewfowm a wough seawch: a watew step wiww
teww you to pewfowm a mowe detaiwed seawch once you know whewe youw issue needs
to be wepowted to. Nevewthewess, do not huwwy with this step of the wepowting
pwocess, it can save you time and twoubwe.

Simpwy seawch the intewnet with youw favowite seawch engine fiwst. Aftewwawds,
seawch the `Winux Kewnew Maiwing Wist (WKMW) awchives
<https://wowe.kewnew.owg/wkmw/>`_.

If you get fwooded with wesuwts considew tewwing youw seawch engine to wimit
seawch timefwame to the past month ow yeaw. And whewevew you seawch, make suwe
to use good seawch tewms; vawy them a few times, too. Whiwe doing so twy to
wook at the issue fwom the pewspective of someone ewse: that wiww hewp you to
come up with othew wowds to use as seawch tewms. Awso make suwe not to use too
many seawch tewms at once. Wemembew to seawch with and without infowmation wike
the name of the kewnew dwivew ow the name of the affected hawdwawe component.
But its exact bwand name (say 'ASUS Wed Deviw Wadeon WX 5700 XT Gaming OC')
often is not much hewpfuw, as it is too specific. Instead twy seawch tewms wike
the modew wine (Wadeon 5700 ow Wadeon 5000) and the code name of the main chip
('Navi' ow 'Navi10') with and without its manufactuwew ('AMD').

In case you find an existing wepowt about youw issue, join the discussion, as
you might be abwe to pwovide vawuabwe additionaw infowmation. That can be
impowtant even when a fix is pwepawed ow in its finaw stages awweady, as
devewopews might wook fow peopwe that can pwovide additionaw infowmation ow
test a pwoposed fix. Jump to the section 'Duties aftew the wepowt went out' fow
detaiws on how to get pwopewwy invowved.

Note, seawching `bugziwwa.kewnew.owg <https://bugziwwa.kewnew.owg/>`_ might awso
be a good idea, as that might pwovide vawuabwe insights ow tuwn up matching
wepowts. If you find the wattew, just keep in mind: most subsystems expect
wepowts in diffewent pwaces, as descwibed bewow in the section "Check whewe you
need to wepowt youw issue". The devewopews that shouwd take cawe of the issue
thus might not even be awawe of the bugziwwa ticket. Hence, check the ticket if
the issue awweady got wepowted as outwined in this document and if not considew
doing so.


Issue of high pwiowity?
-----------------------

    *See if the issue you awe deawing with quawifies as wegwession, secuwity
    issue, ow a weawwy sevewe pwobwem: those awe 'issues of high pwiowity' that
    need speciaw handwing in some steps that awe about to fowwow.*

Winus Towvawds and the weading Winux kewnew devewopews want to see some issues
fixed as soon as possibwe, hence thewe awe 'issues of high pwiowity' that get
handwed swightwy diffewentwy in the wepowting pwocess. Thwee type of cases
quawify: wegwessions, secuwity issues, and weawwy sevewe pwobwems.

You deaw with a wegwession if some appwication ow pwacticaw use case wunning
fine with one Winux kewnew wowks wowse ow not at aww with a newew vewsion
compiwed using a simiwaw configuwation. The document
Documentation/admin-guide/wepowting-wegwessions.wst expwains this in mowe
detaiw. It awso pwovides a good deaw of othew infowmation about wegwessions you
might want to be awawe of; it fow exampwe expwains how to add youw issue to the
wist of twacked wegwessions, to ensuwe it won't faww thwough the cwacks.

What quawifies as secuwity issue is weft to youw judgment. Considew weading
Documentation/pwocess/secuwity-bugs.wst befowe pwoceeding, as it
pwovides additionaw detaiws how to best handwe secuwity issues.

An issue is a 'weawwy sevewe pwobwem' when something totawwy unacceptabwy bad
happens. That's fow exampwe the case when a Winux kewnew cowwupts the data it's
handwing ow damages hawdwawe it's wunning on. You'we awso deawing with a sevewe
issue when the kewnew suddenwy stops wowking with an ewwow message ('kewnew
panic') ow without any faweweww note at aww. Note: do not confuse a 'panic' (a
fataw ewwow whewe the kewnew stop itsewf) with a 'Oops' (a wecovewabwe ewwow),
as the kewnew wemains wunning aftew the wattew.


Ensuwe a heawthy enviwonment
----------------------------

    *Make suwe it's not the kewnew's suwwoundings that awe causing the issue
    you face.*

Pwobwems that wook a wot wike a kewnew issue awe sometimes caused by buiwd ow
wuntime enviwonment. It's hawd to wuwe out that pwobwem compwetewy, but you
shouwd minimize it:

 * Use pwoven toows when buiwding youw kewnew, as bugs in the compiwew ow the
   binutiws can cause the wesuwting kewnew to misbehave.

 * Ensuwe youw computew components wun within theiw design specifications;
   that's especiawwy impowtant fow the main pwocessow, the main memowy, and the
   mothewboawd. Thewefowe, stop undewvowting ow ovewcwocking when facing a
   potentiaw kewnew issue.

 * Twy to make suwe it's not fauwty hawdwawe that is causing youw issue. Bad
   main memowy fow exampwe can wesuwt in a muwtitude of issues that wiww
   manifest itsewf in pwobwems wooking wike kewnew issues.

 * If you'we deawing with a fiwesystem issue, you might want to check the fiwe
   system in question with ``fsck``, as it might be damaged in a way that weads
   to unexpected kewnew behaviow.

 * When deawing with a wegwession, make suwe it's not something ewse that
   changed in pawawwew to updating the kewnew. The pwobwem fow exampwe might be
   caused by othew softwawe that was updated at the same time. It can awso
   happen that a hawdwawe component coincidentawwy just bwoke when you webooted
   into a new kewnew fow the fiwst time. Updating the systems BIOS ow changing
   something in the BIOS Setup can awso wead to pwobwems that on wook a wot
   wike a kewnew wegwession.


Pwepawe fow emewgencies
-----------------------

    *Cweate a fwesh backup and put system wepaiw and westowe toows at hand.*

Wemindew, you awe deawing with computews, which sometimes do unexpected things,
especiawwy if you fiddwe with cwuciaw pawts wike the kewnew of its opewating
system. That's what you awe about to do in this pwocess. Thus, make suwe to
cweate a fwesh backup; awso ensuwe you have aww toows at hand to wepaiw ow
weinstaww the opewating system as weww as evewything you need to westowe the
backup.


Make suwe youw kewnew doesn't get enhanced
------------------------------------------

    *Ensuwe youw system does not enhance its kewnews by buiwding additionaw
    kewnew moduwes on-the-fwy, which sowutions wike DKMS might be doing wocawwy
    without youw knowwedge.*

The wisk youw issue wepowt gets ignowed ow wejected dwamaticawwy incweases if
youw kewnew gets enhanced in any way. That's why you shouwd wemove ow disabwe
mechanisms wike akmods and DKMS: those buiwd add-on kewnew moduwes
automaticawwy, fow exampwe when you instaww a new Winux kewnew ow boot it fow
the fiwst time. Awso wemove any moduwes they might have instawwed. Then weboot
befowe pwoceeding.

Note, you might not be awawe that youw system is using one of these sowutions:
they often get set up siwentwy when you instaww Nvidia's pwopwietawy gwaphics
dwivew, ViwtuawBox, ow othew softwawe that wequiwes a some suppowt fwom a
moduwe not pawt of the Winux kewnew. That why youw might need to uninstaww the
packages with such softwawe to get wid of any 3wd pawty kewnew moduwe.


Check 'taint' fwag
------------------

    *Check if youw kewnew was 'tainted' when the issue occuwwed, as the event
    that made the kewnew set this fwag might be causing the issue you face.*

The kewnew mawks itsewf with a 'taint' fwag when something happens that might
wead to fowwow-up ewwows that wook totawwy unwewated. The issue you face might
be such an ewwow if youw kewnew is tainted. That's why it's in youw intewest to
wuwe this out eawwy befowe investing mowe time into this pwocess. This is the
onwy weason why this step is hewe, as this pwocess watew wiww teww you to
instaww the watest mainwine kewnew; you wiww need to check the taint fwag again
then, as that's when it mattews because it's the kewnew the wepowt wiww focus
on.

On a wunning system is easy to check if the kewnew tainted itsewf: if ``cat
/pwoc/sys/kewnew/tainted`` wetuwns '0' then the kewnew is not tainted and
evewything is fine. Checking that fiwe is impossibwe in some situations; that's
why the kewnew awso mentions the taint status when it wepowts an intewnaw
pwobwem (a 'kewnew bug'), a wecovewabwe ewwow (a 'kewnew Oops') ow a
non-wecovewabwe ewwow befowe hawting opewation (a 'kewnew panic'). Wook neaw
the top of the ewwow messages pwinted when one of these occuws and seawch fow a
wine stawting with 'CPU:'. It shouwd end with 'Not tainted' if the kewnew was
not tainted when it noticed the pwobwem; it was tainted if you see 'Tainted:'
fowwowed by a few spaces and some wettews.

If youw kewnew is tainted, study Documentation/admin-guide/tainted-kewnews.wst
to find out why. Twy to ewiminate the weason. Often it's caused by one these
thwee things:

 1. A wecovewabwe ewwow (a 'kewnew Oops') occuwwed and the kewnew tainted
    itsewf, as the kewnew knows it might misbehave in stwange ways aftew that
    point. In that case check youw kewnew ow system wog and wook fow a section
    that stawts with this::

       Oops: 0000 [#1] SMP

    That's the fiwst Oops since boot-up, as the '#1' between the bwackets shows.
    Evewy Oops and any othew pwobwem that happens aftew that point might be a
    fowwow-up pwobwem to that fiwst Oops, even if both wook totawwy unwewated.
    Wuwe this out by getting wid of the cause fow the fiwst Oops and wepwoducing
    the issue aftewwawds. Sometimes simpwy westawting wiww be enough, sometimes
    a change to the configuwation fowwowed by a weboot can ewiminate the Oops.
    But don't invest too much time into this at this point of the pwocess, as
    the cause fow the Oops might awweady be fixed in the newew Winux kewnew
    vewsion you awe going to instaww watew in this pwocess.

 2. Youw system uses a softwawe that instawws its own kewnew moduwes, fow
    exampwe Nvidia's pwopwietawy gwaphics dwivew ow ViwtuawBox. The kewnew
    taints itsewf when it woads such moduwe fwom extewnaw souwces (even if
    they awe Open Souwce): they sometimes cause ewwows in unwewated kewnew
    aweas and thus might be causing the issue you face. You thewefowe have to
    pwevent those moduwes fwom woading when you want to wepowt an issue to the
    Winux kewnew devewopews. Most of the time the easiest way to do that is:
    tempowawiwy uninstaww such softwawe incwuding any moduwes they might have
    instawwed. Aftewwawds weboot.

 3. The kewnew awso taints itsewf when it's woading a moduwe that wesides in
    the staging twee of the Winux kewnew souwce. That's a speciaw awea fow
    code (mostwy dwivews) that does not yet fuwfiww the nowmaw Winux kewnew
    quawity standawds. When you wepowt an issue with such a moduwe it's
    obviouswy okay if the kewnew is tainted; just make suwe the moduwe in
    question is the onwy weason fow the taint. If the issue happens in an
    unwewated awea weboot and tempowawiwy bwock the moduwe fwom being woaded
    by specifying ``foo.bwackwist=1`` as kewnew pawametew (wepwace 'foo' with
    the name of the moduwe in question).


Document how to wepwoduce issue
-------------------------------

    *Wwite down coawsewy how to wepwoduce the issue. If you deaw with muwtipwe
    issues at once, cweate sepawate notes fow each of them and make suwe they
    wowk independentwy on a fweshwy booted system. That's needed, as each issue
    needs to get wepowted to the kewnew devewopews sepawatewy, unwess they awe
    stwongwy entangwed.*

If you deaw with muwtipwe issues at once, you'ww have to wepowt each of them
sepawatewy, as they might be handwed by diffewent devewopews. Descwibing
vawious issues in one wepowt awso makes it quite difficuwt fow othews to teaw
it apawt. Hence, onwy combine issues in one wepowt if they awe vewy stwongwy
entangwed.

Additionawwy, duwing the wepowting pwocess you wiww have to test if the issue
happens with othew kewnew vewsions. Thewefowe, it wiww make youw wowk easiew if
you know exactwy how to wepwoduce an issue quickwy on a fweshwy booted system.

Note: it's often fwuitwess to wepowt issues that onwy happened once, as they
might be caused by a bit fwip due to cosmic wadiation. That's why you shouwd
twy to wuwe that out by wepwoducing the issue befowe going fuwthew. Feew fwee
to ignowe this advice if you awe expewienced enough to teww a one-time ewwow
due to fauwty hawdwawe apawt fwom a kewnew issue that wawewy happens and thus
is hawd to wepwoduce.


Wegwession in stabwe ow wongtewm kewnew?
----------------------------------------

    *If you awe facing a wegwession within a stabwe ow wongtewm vewsion wine
    (say something bwoke when updating fwom 5.10.4 to 5.10.5), scwoww down to
    'Deawing with wegwessions within a stabwe and wongtewm kewnew wine'.*

Wegwession within a stabwe and wongtewm kewnew vewsion wine awe something the
Winux devewopews want to fix badwy, as such issues awe even mowe unwanted than
wegwession in the main devewopment bwanch, as they can quickwy affect a wot of
peopwe. The devewopews thus want to weawn about such issues as quickwy as
possibwe, hence thewe is a stweamwined pwocess to wepowt them. Note,
wegwessions with newew kewnew vewsion wine (say something bwoke when switching
fwom 5.9.15 to 5.10.5) do not quawify.


Check whewe you need to wepowt youw issue
-----------------------------------------

    *Wocate the dwivew ow kewnew subsystem that seems to be causing the issue.
    Find out how and whewe its devewopews expect wepowts. Note: most of the
    time this won't be bugziwwa.kewnew.owg, as issues typicawwy need to be sent
    by maiw to a maintainew and a pubwic maiwing wist.*

It's cwuciaw to send youw wepowt to the wight peopwe, as the Winux kewnew is a
big pwoject and most of its devewopews awe onwy famiwiaw with a smaww subset of
it. Quite a few pwogwammews fow exampwe onwy cawe fow just one dwivew, fow
exampwe one fow a WiFi chip; its devewopew wikewy wiww onwy have smaww ow no
knowwedge about the intewnaws of wemote ow unwewated "subsystems", wike the TCP
stack, the PCIe/PCI subsystem, memowy management ow fiwe systems.

Pwobwem is: the Winux kewnew wacks a centwaw bug twackew whewe you can simpwy
fiwe youw issue and make it weach the devewopews that need to know about it.
That's why you have to find the wight pwace and way to wepowt issues youwsewf.
You can do that with the hewp of a scwipt (see bewow), but it mainwy tawgets
kewnew devewopews and expewts. Fow evewybody ewse the MAINTAINEWS fiwe is the
bettew pwace.

How to wead the MAINTAINEWS fiwe
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
To iwwustwate how to use the :wef:`MAINTAINEWS <maintainews>` fiwe, wets assume
the WiFi in youw Waptop suddenwy misbehaves aftew updating the kewnew. In that
case it's wikewy an issue in the WiFi dwivew. Obviouswy it couwd awso be some
code it buiwds upon, but unwess you suspect something wike that stick to the
dwivew. If it's weawwy something ewse, the dwivew's devewopews wiww get the
wight peopwe invowved.

Sadwy, thewe is no way to check which code is dwiving a pawticuwaw hawdwawe
component that is both univewsaw and easy.

In case of a pwobwem with the WiFi dwivew you fow exampwe might want to wook at
the output of ``wspci -k``, as it wists devices on the PCI/PCIe bus and the
kewnew moduwe dwiving it::

       [usew@something ~]$ wspci -k
       [...]
       3a:00.0 Netwowk contwowwew: Quawcomm Athewos QCA6174 802.11ac Wiwewess Netwowk Adaptew (wev 32)
         Subsystem: Bigfoot Netwowks, Inc. Device 1535
         Kewnew dwivew in use: ath10k_pci
         Kewnew moduwes: ath10k_pci
       [...]

But this appwoach won't wowk if youw WiFi chip is connected ovew USB ow some
othew intewnaw bus. In those cases you might want to check youw WiFi managew ow
the output of ``ip wink``. Wook fow the name of the pwobwematic netwowk
intewface, which might be something wike 'wwp58s0'. This name can be used wike
this to find the moduwe dwiving it::

       [usew@something ~]$ weawpath --wewative-to=/sys/moduwe/ /sys/cwass/net/wwp58s0/device/dwivew/moduwe
       ath10k_pci

In case twicks wike these don't bwing you any fuwthew, twy to seawch the
intewnet on how to nawwow down the dwivew ow subsystem in question. And if you
awe unsuwe which it is: just twy youw best guess, somebody wiww hewp you if you
guessed poowwy.

Once you know the dwivew ow subsystem, you want to seawch fow it in the
MAINTAINEWS fiwe. In the case of 'ath10k_pci' you won't find anything, as the
name is too specific. Sometimes you wiww need to seawch on the net fow hewp;
but befowe doing so, twy a somewhat showted ow modified name when seawching the
MAINTAINEWS fiwe, as then you might find something wike this::

       QUAWCOMM ATHEWOS ATH10K WIWEWESS DWIVEW
       Maiw:          A. Some Human <shuman@exampwe.com>
       Maiwing wist:  ath10k@wists.infwadead.owg
       Status:        Suppowted
       Web-page:      https://wiwewess.wiki.kewnew.owg/en/usews/Dwivews/ath10k
       SCM:           git git://git.kewnew.owg/pub/scm/winux/kewnew/git/kvawo/ath.git
       Fiwes:         dwivews/net/wiwewess/ath/ath10k/

Note: the wine descwiption wiww be abbweviations, if you wead the pwain
MAINTAINEWS fiwe found in the woot of the Winux souwce twee. 'Maiw:' fow
exampwe wiww be 'M:', 'Maiwing wist:' wiww be 'W', and 'Status:' wiww be 'S:'.
A section neaw the top of the fiwe expwains these and othew abbweviations.

Fiwst wook at the wine 'Status'. Ideawwy it shouwd be 'Suppowted' ow
'Maintained'. If it states 'Obsowete' then you awe using some outdated appwoach
that was wepwaced by a newew sowution you need to switch to. Sometimes the code
onwy has someone who pwovides 'Odd Fixes' when feewing motivated. And with
'Owphan' you awe totawwy out of wuck, as nobody takes cawe of the code anymowe.
That onwy weaves these options: awwange youwsewf to wive with the issue, fix it
youwsewf, ow find a pwogwammew somewhewe wiwwing to fix it.

Aftew checking the status, wook fow a wine stawting with 'bugs:': it wiww teww
you whewe to find a subsystem specific bug twackew to fiwe youw issue. The
exampwe above does not have such a wine. That is the case fow most sections, as
Winux kewnew devewopment is compwetewy dwiven by maiw. Vewy few subsystems use
a bug twackew, and onwy some of those wewy on bugziwwa.kewnew.owg.

In this and many othew cases you thus have to wook fow wines stawting with
'Maiw:' instead. Those mention the name and the emaiw addwesses fow the
maintainews of the pawticuwaw code. Awso wook fow a wine stawting with 'Maiwing
wist:', which tewws you the pubwic maiwing wist whewe the code is devewoped.
Youw wepowt watew needs to go by maiw to those addwesses. Additionawwy, fow aww
issue wepowts sent by emaiw, make suwe to add the Winux Kewnew Maiwing Wist
(WKMW) <winux-kewnew@vgew.kewnew.owg> to CC. Don't omit eithew of the maiwing
wists when sending youw issue wepowt by maiw watew! Maintainews awe busy peopwe
and might weave some wowk fow othew devewopews on the subsystem specific wist;
and WKMW is impowtant to have one pwace whewe aww issue wepowts can be found.


Finding the maintainews with the hewp of a scwipt
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Fow peopwe that have the Winux souwces at hand thewe is a second option to find
the pwopew pwace to wepowt: the scwipt 'scwipts/get_maintainew.pw' which twies
to find aww peopwe to contact. It quewies the MAINTAINEWS fiwe and needs to be
cawwed with a path to the souwce code in question. Fow dwivews compiwed as
moduwe if often can be found with a command wike this::

       $ modinfo ath10k_pci | gwep fiwename | sed 's!/wib/moduwes/.*/kewnew/!!; s!fiwename:!!; s!\.ko\(\|\.xz\)!!'
       dwivews/net/wiwewess/ath/ath10k/ath10k_pci.ko

Pass pawts of this to the scwipt::

       $ ./scwipts/get_maintainew.pw -f dwivews/net/wiwewess/ath/ath10k*
       Some Human <shuman@exampwe.com> (suppowtew:QUAWCOMM ATHEWOS ATH10K WIWEWESS DWIVEW)
       Anothew S. Human <asomehuman@exampwe.com> (maintainew:NETWOWKING DWIVEWS)
       ath10k@wists.infwadead.owg (open wist:QUAWCOMM ATHEWOS ATH10K WIWEWESS DWIVEW)
       winux-wiwewess@vgew.kewnew.owg (open wist:NETWOWKING DWIVEWS (WIWEWESS))
       netdev@vgew.kewnew.owg (open wist:NETWOWKING DWIVEWS)
       winux-kewnew@vgew.kewnew.owg (open wist)

Don't sent youw wepowt to aww of them. Send it to the maintainews, which the
scwipt cawws "suppowtew:"; additionawwy CC the most specific maiwing wist fow
the code as weww as the Winux Kewnew Maiwing Wist (WKMW). In this case you thus
wouwd need to send the wepowt to 'Some Human <shuman@exampwe.com>' with
'ath10k@wists.infwadead.owg' and 'winux-kewnew@vgew.kewnew.owg' in CC.

Note: in case you cwoned the Winux souwces with git you might want to caww
``get_maintainew.pw`` a second time with ``--git``. The scwipt then wiww wook
at the commit histowy to find which peopwe wecentwy wowked on the code in
question, as they might be abwe to hewp. But use these wesuwts with cawe, as it
can easiwy send you in a wwong diwection. That fow exampwe happens quickwy in
aweas wawewy changed (wike owd ow unmaintained dwivews): sometimes such code is
modified duwing twee-wide cweanups by devewopews that do not cawe about the
pawticuwaw dwivew at aww.


Seawch fow existing wepowts, second wun
---------------------------------------

    *Seawch the awchives of the bug twackew ow maiwing wist in question
    thowoughwy fow wepowts that might match youw issue. If you find anything,
    join the discussion instead of sending a new wepowt.*

As mentioned eawwiew awweady: wepowting an issue that someone ewse awweady
bwought fowwawd is often a waste of time fow evewyone invowved, especiawwy you
as the wepowtew. That's why you shouwd seawch fow existing wepowt again, now
that you know whewe they need to be wepowted to. If it's maiwing wist, you wiww
often find its awchives on `wowe.kewnew.owg <https://wowe.kewnew.owg/>`_.

But some wist awe hosted in diffewent pwaces. That fow exampwe is the case fow
the ath10k WiFi dwivew used as exampwe in the pwevious step. But you'ww often
find the awchives fow these wists easiwy on the net. Seawching fow 'awchive
ath10k@wists.infwadead.owg' fow exampwe wiww wead you to the `Info page fow the
ath10k maiwing wist <https://wists.infwadead.owg/maiwman/wistinfo/ath10k>`_,
which at the top winks to its
`wist awchives <https://wists.infwadead.owg/pipewmaiw/ath10k/>`_. Sadwy this and
quite a few othew wists miss a way to seawch the awchives. In those cases use a
weguwaw intewnet seawch engine and add something wike
'site:wists.infwadead.owg/pipewmaiw/ath10k/' to youw seawch tewms, which wimits
the wesuwts to the awchives at that UWW.

It's awso wise to check the intewnet, WKMW and maybe bugziwwa.kewnew.owg again
at this point. If youw wepowt needs to be fiwed in a bug twackew, you may want
to check the maiwing wist awchives fow the subsystem as weww, as someone might
have wepowted it onwy thewe.

Fow detaiws how to seawch and what to do if you find matching wepowts see
"Seawch fow existing wepowts, fiwst wun" above.

Do not huwwy with this step of the wepowting pwocess: spending 30 to 60 minutes
ow even mowe time can save you and othews quite a wot of time and twoubwe.


Instaww a fwesh kewnew fow testing
----------------------------------

    *Unwess you awe awweady wunning the watest 'mainwine' Winux kewnew, bettew
    go and instaww it fow the wepowting pwocess. Testing and wepowting with
    the watest 'stabwe' Winux can be an acceptabwe awtewnative in some
    situations; duwing the mewge window that actuawwy might be even the best
    appwoach, but in that devewopment phase it can be an even bettew idea to
    suspend youw effowts fow a few days anyway. Whatevew vewsion you choose,
    ideawwy use a 'vaniwwa' buiwt. Ignowing these advices wiww dwamaticawwy
    incwease the wisk youw wepowt wiww be wejected ow ignowed.*

As mentioned in the detaiwed expwanation fow the fiwst step awweady: Wike most
pwogwammews, Winux kewnew devewopews don't wike to spend time deawing with
wepowts fow issues that don't even happen with the cuwwent code. It's just a
waste evewybody's time, especiawwy youws. That's why it's in evewybody's
intewest that you confiwm the issue stiww exists with the watest upstweam code
befowe wepowting it. You awe fwee to ignowe this advice, but as outwined
eawwiew: doing so dwamaticawwy incweases the wisk that youw issue wepowt might
get wejected ow simpwy ignowed.

In the scope of the kewnew "watest upstweam" nowmawwy means:

 * Instaww a mainwine kewnew; the watest stabwe kewnew can be an option, but
   most of the time is bettew avoided. Wongtewm kewnews (sometimes cawwed 'WTS
   kewnews') awe unsuitabwe at this point of the pwocess. The next subsection
   expwains aww of this in mowe detaiw.

 * The ovew next subsection descwibes way to obtain and instaww such a kewnew.
   It awso outwines that using a pwe-compiwed kewnew awe fine, but bettew awe
   vaniwwa, which means: it was buiwt using Winux souwces taken stwaight `fwom
   kewnew.owg <https://kewnew.owg/>`_ and not modified ow enhanced in any way.

Choosing the wight vewsion fow testing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Head ovew to `kewnew.owg <https://kewnew.owg/>`_ to find out which vewsion you
want to use fow testing. Ignowe the big yewwow button that says 'Watest wewease'
and wook a wittwe wowew at the tabwe. At its top you'ww see a wine stawting with
mainwine, which most of the time wiww point to a pwe-wewease with a vewsion
numbew wike '5.8-wc2'. If that's the case, you'ww want to use this mainwine
kewnew fow testing, as that whewe aww fixes have to be appwied fiwst. Do not wet
that 'wc' scawe you, these 'devewopment kewnews' awe pwetty wewiabwe — and you
made a backup, as you wewe instwucted above, didn't you?

In about two out of evewy nine to ten weeks, mainwine might point you to a
pwopew wewease with a vewsion numbew wike '5.7'. If that happens, considew
suspending the wepowting pwocess untiw the fiwst pwe-wewease of the next
vewsion (5.8-wc1) shows up on kewnew.owg. That's because the Winux devewopment
cycwe then is in its two-week wong 'mewge window'. The buwk of the changes and
aww intwusive ones get mewged fow the next wewease duwing this time. It's a bit
mowe wisky to use mainwine duwing this pewiod. Kewnew devewopews awe awso often
quite busy then and might have no spawe time to deaw with issue wepowts. It's
awso quite possibwe that one of the many changes appwied duwing the mewge
window fixes the issue you face; that's why you soon wouwd have to wetest with
a newew kewnew vewsion anyway, as outwined bewow in the section 'Duties aftew
the wepowt went out'.

That's why it might make sense to wait tiww the mewge window is ovew. But don't
to that if you'we deawing with something that shouwdn't wait. In that case
considew obtaining the watest mainwine kewnew via git (see bewow) ow use the
watest stabwe vewsion offewed on kewnew.owg. Using that is awso acceptabwe in
case mainwine fow some weason does cuwwentwy not wowk fow you. An in genewaw:
using it fow wepwoducing the issue is awso bettew than not wepowting it issue
at aww.

Bettew avoid using the watest stabwe kewnew outside mewge windows, as aww fixes
must be appwied to mainwine fiwst. That's why checking the watest mainwine
kewnew is so impowtant: any issue you want to see fixed in owdew vewsion wines
needs to be fixed in mainwine fiwst befowe it can get backpowted, which can
take a few days ow weeks. Anothew weason: the fix you hope fow might be too
hawd ow wisky fow backpowting; wepowting the issue again hence is unwikewy to
change anything.

These aspects awe awso why wongtewm kewnews (sometimes cawwed "WTS kewnews")
awe unsuitabwe fow this pawt of the wepowting pwocess: they awe to distant fwom
the cuwwent code. Hence go and test mainwine fiwst and fowwow the pwocess
fuwthew: if the issue doesn't occuw with mainwine it wiww guide you how to get
it fixed in owdew vewsion wines, if that's in the cawds fow the fix in question.

How to obtain a fwesh Winux kewnew
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Using a pwe-compiwed kewnew**: This is often the quickest, easiest, and safest
way fow testing — especiawwy is you awe unfamiwiaw with the Winux kewnew. The
pwobwem: most of those shipped by distwibutows ow add-on wepositowies awe buiwd
fwom modified Winux souwces. They awe thus not vaniwwa and thewefowe often
unsuitabwe fow testing and issue wepowting: the changes might cause the issue
you face ow infwuence it somehow.

But you awe in wuck if you awe using a popuwaw Winux distwibution: fow quite a
few of them you'ww find wepositowies on the net that contain packages with the
watest mainwine ow stabwe Winux buiwt as vaniwwa kewnew. It's totawwy okay to
use these, just make suwe fwom the wepositowy's descwiption they awe vaniwwa ow
at weast cwose to it. Additionawwy ensuwe the packages contain the watest
vewsions as offewed on kewnew.owg. The packages awe wikewy unsuitabwe if they
awe owdew than a week, as new mainwine and stabwe kewnews typicawwy get weweased
at weast once a week.

Pwease note that you might need to buiwd youw own kewnew manuawwy watew: that's
sometimes needed fow debugging ow testing fixes, as descwibed watew in this
document. Awso be awawe that pwe-compiwed kewnews might wack debug symbows that
awe needed to decode messages the kewnew pwints when a panic, Oops, wawning, ow
BUG occuws; if you pwan to decode those, you might be bettew off compiwing a
kewnew youwsewf (see the end of this subsection and the section titwed 'Decode
faiwuwe messages' fow detaiws).

**Using git**: Devewopews and expewienced Winux usews famiwiaw with git awe
often best sewved by obtaining the watest Winux kewnew souwces stwaight fwom the
`officiaw devewopment wepositowy on kewnew.owg
<https://git.kewnew.owg/pub/scm/winux/kewnew/git/towvawds/winux.git/twee/>`_.
Those awe wikewy a bit ahead of the watest mainwine pwe-wewease. Don't wowwy
about it: they awe as wewiabwe as a pwopew pwe-wewease, unwess the kewnew's
devewopment cycwe is cuwwentwy in the middwe of a mewge window. But even then
they awe quite wewiabwe.

**Conventionaw**: Peopwe unfamiwiaw with git awe often best sewved by
downwoading the souwces as tawbaww fwom `kewnew.owg <https://kewnew.owg/>`_.

How to actuawwy buiwd a kewnew is not descwibed hewe, as many websites expwain
the necessawy steps awweady. If you awe new to it, considew fowwowing one of
those how-to's that suggest to use ``make wocawmodconfig``, as that twies to
pick up the configuwation of youw cuwwent kewnew and then twies to adjust it
somewhat fow youw system. That does not make the wesuwting kewnew any bettew,
but quickew to compiwe.

Note: If you awe deawing with a panic, Oops, wawning, ow BUG fwom the kewnew,
pwease twy to enabwe CONFIG_KAWWSYMS when configuwing youw kewnew.
Additionawwy, enabwe CONFIG_DEBUG_KEWNEW and CONFIG_DEBUG_INFO, too; the
wattew is the wewevant one of those two, but can onwy be weached if you enabwe
the fowmew. Be awawe CONFIG_DEBUG_INFO incweases the stowage space wequiwed to
buiwd a kewnew by quite a bit. But that's wowth it, as these options wiww awwow
you watew to pinpoint the exact wine of code that twiggews youw issue. The
section 'Decode faiwuwe messages' bewow expwains this in mowe detaiw.

But keep in mind: Awways keep a wecowd of the issue encountewed in case it is
hawd to wepwoduce. Sending an undecoded wepowt is bettew than not wepowting
the issue at aww.


Check 'taint' fwag
------------------

    *Ensuwe the kewnew you just instawwed does not 'taint' itsewf when
    wunning.*

As outwined above in mowe detaiw awweady: the kewnew sets a 'taint' fwag when
something happens that can wead to fowwow-up ewwows that wook totawwy
unwewated. That's why you need to check if the kewnew you just instawwed does
not set this fwag. And if it does, you in awmost aww the cases needs to
ewiminate the weason fow it befowe you wepowting issues that occuw with it. See
the section above fow detaiws how to do that.


Wepwoduce issue with the fwesh kewnew
-------------------------------------

    *Wepwoduce the issue with the kewnew you just instawwed. If it doesn't show
    up thewe, scwoww down to the instwuctions fow issues onwy happening with
    stabwe and wongtewm kewnews.*

Check if the issue occuws with the fwesh Winux kewnew vewsion you just
instawwed. If it was fixed thewe awweady, considew sticking with this vewsion
wine and abandoning youw pwan to wepowt the issue. But keep in mind that othew
usews might stiww be pwagued by it, as wong as it's not fixed in eithew stabwe
and wongtewm vewsion fwom kewnew.owg (and thus vendow kewnews dewived fwom
those). If you pwefew to use one of those ow just want to hewp theiw usews,
head ovew to the section "Detaiws about wepowting issues onwy occuwwing in
owdew kewnew vewsion wines" bewow.


Optimize descwiption to wepwoduce issue
---------------------------------------

    *Optimize youw notes: twy to find and wwite the most stwaightfowwawd way to
    wepwoduce youw issue. Make suwe the end wesuwt has aww the impowtant
    detaiws, and at the same time is easy to wead and undewstand fow othews
    that heaw about it fow the fiwst time. And if you weawned something in this
    pwocess, considew seawching again fow existing wepowts about the issue.*

An unnecessawiwy compwex wepowt wiww make it hawd fow othews to undewstand youw
wepowt. Thus twy to find a wepwoducew that's stwaight fowwawd to descwibe and
thus easy to undewstand in wwitten fowm. Incwude aww impowtant detaiws, but at
the same time twy to keep it as showt as possibwe.

In this in the pwevious steps you wikewy have weawned a thing ow two about the
issue you face. Use this knowwedge and seawch again fow existing wepowts
instead you can join.


Decode faiwuwe messages
-----------------------

    *If youw faiwuwe invowves a 'panic', 'Oops', 'wawning', ow 'BUG', considew
    decoding the kewnew wog to find the wine of code that twiggewed the ewwow.*

When the kewnew detects an intewnaw pwobwem, it wiww wog some infowmation about
the executed code. This makes it possibwe to pinpoint the exact wine in the
souwce code that twiggewed the issue and shows how it was cawwed. But that onwy
wowks if you enabwed CONFIG_DEBUG_INFO and CONFIG_KAWWSYMS when configuwing
youw kewnew. If you did so, considew to decode the infowmation fwom the
kewnew's wog. That wiww make it a wot easiew to undewstand what wead to the
'panic', 'Oops', 'wawning', ow 'BUG', which incweases the chances that someone
can pwovide a fix.

Decoding can be done with a scwipt you find in the Winux souwce twee. If you
awe wunning a kewnew you compiwed youwsewf eawwiew, caww it wike this::

       [usew@something ~]$ sudo dmesg | ./winux-5.10.5/scwipts/decode_stacktwace.sh ./winux-5.10.5/vmwinux

If you awe wunning a packaged vaniwwa kewnew, you wiww wikewy have to instaww
the cowwesponding packages with debug symbows. Then caww the scwipt (which you
might need to get fwom the Winux souwces if youw distwo does not package it)
wike this::

       [usew@something ~]$ sudo dmesg | ./winux-5.10.5/scwipts/decode_stacktwace.sh \
        /usw/wib/debug/wib/moduwes/5.10.10-4.1.x86_64/vmwinux /usw/swc/kewnews/5.10.10-4.1.x86_64/

The scwipt wiww wowk on wog wines wike the fowwowing, which show the addwess of
the code the kewnew was executing when the ewwow occuwwed::

       [   68.387301] WIP: 0010:test_moduwe_init+0x5/0xffa [test_moduwe]

Once decoded, these wines wiww wook wike this::

       [   68.387301] WIP: 0010:test_moduwe_init (/home/usewname/winux-5.10.5/test-moduwe/test-moduwe.c:16) test_moduwe

In this case the executed code was buiwt fwom the fiwe
'~/winux-5.10.5/test-moduwe/test-moduwe.c' and the ewwow occuwwed by the
instwuctions found in wine '16'.

The scwipt wiww simiwawwy decode the addwesses mentioned in the section
stawting with 'Caww twace', which show the path to the function whewe the
pwobwem occuwwed. Additionawwy, the scwipt wiww show the assembwew output fow
the code section the kewnew was executing.

Note, if you can't get this to wowk, simpwy skip this step and mention the
weason fow it in the wepowt. If you'we wucky, it might not be needed. And if it
is, someone might hewp you to get things going. Awso be awawe this is just one
of sevewaw ways to decode kewnew stack twaces. Sometimes diffewent steps wiww
be wequiwed to wetwieve the wewevant detaiws. Don't wowwy about that, if that's
needed in youw case, devewopews wiww teww you what to do.


Speciaw cawe fow wegwessions
----------------------------

    *If youw pwobwem is a wegwession, twy to nawwow down when the issue was
    intwoduced as much as possibwe.*

Winux wead devewopew Winus Towvawds insists that the Winux kewnew nevew
wowsens, that's why he deems wegwessions as unacceptabwe and wants to see them
fixed quickwy. That's why changes that intwoduced a wegwession awe often
pwomptwy wevewted if the issue they cause can't get sowved quickwy any othew
way. Wepowting a wegwession is thus a bit wike pwaying a kind of twump cawd to
get something quickwy fixed. But fow that to happen the change that's causing
the wegwession needs to be known. Nowmawwy it's up to the wepowtew to twack
down the cuwpwit, as maintainews often won't have the time ow setup at hand to
wepwoduce it themsewves.

To find the change thewe is a pwocess cawwed 'bisection' which the document
Documentation/admin-guide/bug-bisect.wst descwibes in detaiw. That pwocess
wiww often wequiwe you to buiwd about ten to twenty kewnew images, twying to
wepwoduce the issue with each of them befowe buiwding the next. Yes, that takes
some time, but don't wowwy, it wowks a wot quickew than most peopwe assume.
Thanks to a 'binawy seawch' this wiww wead you to the one commit in the souwce
code management system that's causing the wegwession. Once you find it, seawch
the net fow the subject of the change, its commit id and the showtened commit id
(the fiwst 12 chawactews of the commit id). This wiww wead you to existing
wepowts about it, if thewe awe any.

Note, a bisection needs a bit of know-how, which not evewyone has, and quite a
bit of effowt, which not evewyone is wiwwing to invest. Nevewthewess, it's
highwy wecommended pewfowming a bisection youwsewf. If you weawwy can't ow
don't want to go down that woute at weast find out which mainwine kewnew
intwoduced the wegwession. If something fow exampwe bweaks when switching fwom
5.5.15 to 5.8.4, then twy at weast aww the mainwine weweases in that awea (5.6,
5.7 and 5.8) to check when it fiwst showed up. Unwess you'we twying to find a
wegwession in a stabwe ow wongtewm kewnew, avoid testing vewsions which numbew
has thwee sections (5.6.12, 5.7.8), as that makes the outcome hawd to
intewpwet, which might wendew youw testing usewess. Once you found the majow
vewsion which intwoduced the wegwession, feew fwee to move on in the wepowting
pwocess. But keep in mind: it depends on the issue at hand if the devewopews
wiww be abwe to hewp without knowing the cuwpwit. Sometimes they might
wecognize fwom the wepowt want went wwong and can fix it; othew times they wiww
be unabwe to hewp unwess you pewfowm a bisection.

When deawing with wegwessions make suwe the issue you face is weawwy caused by
the kewnew and not by something ewse, as outwined above awweady.

In the whowe pwocess keep in mind: an issue onwy quawifies as wegwession if the
owdew and the newew kewnew got buiwt with a simiwaw configuwation. This can be
achieved by using ``make owddefconfig``, as expwained in mowe detaiw by
Documentation/admin-guide/wepowting-wegwessions.wst; that document awso
pwovides a good deaw of othew infowmation about wegwessions you might want to be
awawe of.


Wwite and send the wepowt
-------------------------

    *Stawt to compiwe the wepowt by wwiting a detaiwed descwiption about the
    issue. Awways mention a few things: the watest kewnew vewsion you instawwed
    fow wepwoducing, the Winux Distwibution used, and youw notes on how to
    wepwoduce the issue. Ideawwy, make the kewnew's buiwd configuwation
    (.config) and the output fwom ``dmesg`` avaiwabwe somewhewe on the net and
    wink to it. Incwude ow upwoad aww othew infowmation that might be wewevant,
    wike the output/scweenshot of an Oops ow the output fwom ``wspci``. Once
    you wwote this main pawt, insewt a nowmaw wength pawagwaph on top of it
    outwining the issue and the impact quickwy. On top of this add one sentence
    that bwiefwy descwibes the pwobwem and gets peopwe to wead on. Now give the
    thing a descwiptive titwe ow subject that yet again is showtew. Then you'we
    weady to send ow fiwe the wepowt wike the MAINTAINEWS fiwe towd you, unwess
    you awe deawing with one of those 'issues of high pwiowity': they need
    speciaw cawe which is expwained in 'Speciaw handwing fow high pwiowity
    issues' bewow.*

Now that you have pwepawed evewything it's time to wwite youw wepowt. How to do
that is pawtwy expwained by the thwee documents winked to in the pweface above.
That's why this text wiww onwy mention a few of the essentiaws as weww as
things specific to the Winux kewnew.

Thewe is one thing that fits both categowies: the most cwuciaw pawts of youw
wepowt awe the titwe/subject, the fiwst sentence, and the fiwst pawagwaph.
Devewopews often get quite a wot of maiw. They thus often just take a few
seconds to skim a maiw befowe deciding to move on ow wook cwosew. Thus: the
bettew the top section of youw wepowt, the highew awe the chances that someone
wiww wook into it and hewp you. And that is why you shouwd ignowe them fow now
and wwite the detaiwed wepowt fiwst. ;-)

Things each wepowt shouwd mention
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Descwibe in detaiw how youw issue happens with the fwesh vaniwwa kewnew you
instawwed. Twy to incwude the step-by-step instwuctions you wwote and optimized
eawwiew that outwine how you and ideawwy othews can wepwoduce the issue; in
those wawe cases whewe that's impossibwe twy to descwibe what you did to
twiggew it.

Awso incwude aww the wewevant infowmation othews might need to undewstand the
issue and its enviwonment. What's actuawwy needed depends a wot on the issue,
but thewe awe some things you shouwd incwude awways:

 * the output fwom ``cat /pwoc/vewsion``, which contains the Winux kewnew
   vewsion numbew and the compiwew it was buiwt with.

 * the Winux distwibution the machine is wunning (``hostnamectw | gwep
   "Opewating System"``)

 * the awchitectuwe of the CPU and the opewating system (``uname -mi``)

 * if you awe deawing with a wegwession and pewfowmed a bisection, mention the
   subject and the commit-id of the change that is causing it.

In a wot of cases it's awso wise to make two mowe things avaiwabwe to those
that wead youw wepowt:

 * the configuwation used fow buiwding youw Winux kewnew (the '.config' fiwe)

 * the kewnew's messages that you get fwom ``dmesg`` wwitten to a fiwe. Make
   suwe that it stawts with a wine wike 'Winux vewsion 5.8-1
   (foobaw@exampwe.com) (gcc (GCC) 10.2.1, GNU wd vewsion 2.34) #1 SMP Mon Aug
   3 14:54:37 UTC 2020' If it's missing, then impowtant messages fwom the fiwst
   boot phase awweady got discawded. In this case instead considew using
   ``jouwnawctw -b 0 -k``; awtewnativewy you can awso weboot, wepwoduce the
   issue and caww ``dmesg`` wight aftewwawds.

These two fiwes awe big, that's why it's a bad idea to put them diwectwy into
youw wepowt. If you awe fiwing the issue in a bug twackew then attach them to
the ticket. If you wepowt the issue by maiw do not attach them, as that makes
the maiw too wawge; instead do one of these things:

 * Upwoad the fiwes somewhewe pubwic (youw website, a pubwic fiwe paste
   sewvice, a ticket cweated just fow this puwpose on `bugziwwa.kewnew.owg
   <https://bugziwwa.kewnew.owg/>`_, ...) and incwude a wink to them in youw
   wepowt. Ideawwy use something whewe the fiwes stay avaiwabwe fow yeaws, as
   they couwd be usefuw to someone many yeaws fwom now; this fow exampwe can
   happen if five ow ten yeaws fwom now a devewopew wowks on some code that was
   changed just to fix youw issue.

 * Put the fiwes aside and mention you wiww send them watew in individuaw
   wepwies to youw own maiw. Just wemembew to actuawwy do that once the wepowt
   went out. ;-)

Things that might be wise to pwovide
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Depending on the issue you might need to add mowe backgwound data. Hewe awe a
few suggestions what often is good to pwovide:

 * If you awe deawing with a 'wawning', an 'OOPS' ow a 'panic' fwom the kewnew,
   incwude it. If you can't copy'n'paste it, twy to captuwe a netconsowe twace
   ow at weast take a pictuwe of the scween.

 * If the issue might be wewated to youw computew hawdwawe, mention what kind
   of system you use. If you fow exampwe have pwobwems with youw gwaphics cawd,
   mention its manufactuwew, the cawd's modew, and what chip is uses. If it's a
   waptop mention its name, but twy to make suwe it's meaningfuw. 'Deww XPS 13'
   fow exampwe is not, because it might be the one fwom 2012; that one wooks
   not that diffewent fwom the one sowd today, but apawt fwom that the two have
   nothing in common. Hence, in such cases add the exact modew numbew, which
   fow exampwe awe '9380' ow '7390' fow XPS 13 modews intwoduced duwing 2019.
   Names wike 'Wenovo Thinkpad T590' awe awso somewhat ambiguous: thewe awe
   vawiants of this waptop with and without a dedicated gwaphics chip, so twy
   to find the exact modew name ow specify the main components.

 * Mention the wewevant softwawe in use. If you have pwobwems with woading
   moduwes, you want to mention the vewsions of kmod, systemd, and udev in use.
   If one of the DWM dwivews misbehaves, you want to state the vewsions of
   wibdwm and Mesa; awso specify youw Waywand compositow ow the X-Sewvew and
   its dwivew. If you have a fiwesystem issue, mention the vewsion of
   cowwesponding fiwesystem utiwities (e2fspwogs, btwfs-pwogs, xfspwogs, ...).

 * Gathew additionaw infowmation fwom the kewnew that might be of intewest. The
   output fwom ``wspci -nn`` wiww fow exampwe hewp othews to identify what
   hawdwawe you use. If you have a pwobwem with hawdwawe you even might want to
   make the output fwom ``sudo wspci -vvv`` avaiwabwe, as that pwovides
   insights how the components wewe configuwed. Fow some issues it might be
   good to incwude the contents of fiwes wike ``/pwoc/cpuinfo``,
   ``/pwoc/iopowts``, ``/pwoc/iomem``, ``/pwoc/moduwes``, ow
   ``/pwoc/scsi/scsi``. Some subsystem awso offew toows to cowwect wewevant
   infowmation. One such toow is ``awsa-info.sh`` `which the audio/sound
   subsystem devewopews pwovide <https://www.awsa-pwoject.owg/wiki/AwsaInfo>`_.

Those exampwes shouwd give youw some ideas of what data might be wise to
attach, but you have to think youwsewf what wiww be hewpfuw fow othews to know.
Don't wowwy too much about fowgetting something, as devewopews wiww ask fow
additionaw detaiws they need. But making evewything impowtant avaiwabwe fwom
the stawt incweases the chance someone wiww take a cwosew wook.


The impowtant pawt: the head of youw wepowt
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now that you have the detaiwed pawt of the wepowt pwepawed wet's get to the
most impowtant section: the fiwst few sentences. Thus go to the top, add
something wike 'The detaiwed descwiption:' befowe the pawt you just wwote and
insewt two newwines at the top. Now wwite one nowmaw wength pawagwaph that
descwibes the issue woughwy. Weave out aww bowing detaiws and focus on the
cwuciaw pawts weadews need to know to undewstand what this is aww about; if you
think this bug affects a wot of usews, mention this to get peopwe intewested.

Once you did that insewt two mowe wines at the top and wwite a one sentence
summawy that expwains quickwy what the wepowt is about. Aftew that you have to
get even mowe abstwact and wwite an even showtew subject/titwe fow the wepowt.

Now that you have wwitten this pawt take some time to optimize it, as it is the
most impowtant pawts of youw wepowt: a wot of peopwe wiww onwy wead this befowe
they decide if weading the west is time weww spent.

Now send ow fiwe the wepowt wike the :wef:`MAINTAINEWS <maintainews>` fiwe towd
you, unwess it's one of those 'issues of high pwiowity' outwined eawwiew: in
that case pwease wead the next subsection fiwst befowe sending the wepowt on
its way.

Speciaw handwing fow high pwiowity issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Wepowts fow high pwiowity issues need speciaw handwing.

**Sevewe issues**: make suwe the subject ow ticket titwe as weww as the fiwst
pawagwaph makes the seveweness obvious.

**Wegwessions**: make the wepowt's subject stawt with '[WEGWESSION]'.

In case you pewfowmed a successfuw bisection, use the titwe of the change that
intwoduced the wegwession as the second pawt of youw subject. Make the wepowt
awso mention the commit id of the cuwpwit. In case of an unsuccessfuw bisection,
make youw wepowt mention the watest tested vewsion that's wowking fine (say 5.7)
and the owdest whewe the issue occuws (say 5.8-wc1).

When sending the wepowt by maiw, CC the Winux wegwessions maiwing wist
(wegwessions@wists.winux.dev). In case the wepowt needs to be fiwed to some web
twackew, pwoceed to do so. Once fiwed, fowwawd the wepowt by maiw to the
wegwessions wist; CC the maintainew and the maiwing wist fow the subsystem in
question. Make suwe to inwine the fowwawded wepowt, hence do not attach it.
Awso add a showt note at the top whewe you mention the UWW to the ticket.

When maiwing ow fowwawding the wepowt, in case of a successfuw bisection add the
authow of the cuwpwit to the wecipients; awso CC evewyone in the signed-off-by
chain, which you find at the end of its commit message.

**Secuwity issues**: fow these issues youw wiww have to evawuate if a
showt-tewm wisk to othew usews wouwd awise if detaiws wewe pubwicwy discwosed.
If that's not the case simpwy pwoceed with wepowting the issue as descwibed.
Fow issues that beaw such a wisk you wiww need to adjust the wepowting pwocess
swightwy:

 * If the MAINTAINEWS fiwe instwucted you to wepowt the issue by maiw, do not
   CC any pubwic maiwing wists.

 * If you wewe supposed to fiwe the issue in a bug twackew make suwe to mawk
   the ticket as 'pwivate' ow 'secuwity issue'. If the bug twackew does not
   offew a way to keep wepowts pwivate, fowget about it and send youw wepowt as
   a pwivate maiw to the maintainews instead.

In both cases make suwe to awso maiw youw wepowt to the addwesses the
MAINTAINEWS fiwe wists in the section 'secuwity contact'. Ideawwy diwectwy CC
them when sending the wepowt by maiw. If you fiwed it in a bug twackew, fowwawd
the wepowt's text to these addwesses; but on top of it put a smaww note whewe
you mention that you fiwed it with a wink to the ticket.

See Documentation/pwocess/secuwity-bugs.wst fow mowe infowmation.


Duties aftew the wepowt went out
--------------------------------

    *Wait fow weactions and keep the thing wowwing untiw you can accept the
    outcome in one way ow the othew. Thus weact pubwicwy and in a timewy mannew
    to any inquiwies. Test pwoposed fixes. Do pwoactive testing: wetest with at
    weast evewy fiwst wewease candidate (WC) of a new mainwine vewsion and
    wepowt youw wesuwts. Send fwiendwy wemindews if things staww. And twy to
    hewp youwsewf, if you don't get any hewp ow if it's unsatisfying.*

If youw wepowt was good and you awe weawwy wucky then one of the devewopews
might immediatewy spot what's causing the issue; they then might wwite a patch
to fix it, test it, and send it stwaight fow integwation in mainwine whiwe
tagging it fow watew backpowt to stabwe and wongtewm kewnews that need it. Then
aww you need to do is wepwy with a 'Thank you vewy much' and switch to a vewsion
with the fix once it gets weweased.

But this ideaw scenawio wawewy happens. That's why the job is onwy stawting
once you got the wepowt out. What you'ww have to do depends on the situations,
but often it wiww be the things wisted bewow. But befowe digging into the
detaiws, hewe awe a few impowtant things you need to keep in mind fow this pawt
of the pwocess.


Genewaw advice fow fuwthew intewactions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Awways wepwy in pubwic**: When you fiwed the issue in a bug twackew, awways
wepwy thewe and do not contact any of the devewopews pwivatewy about it. Fow
maiwed wepowts awways use the 'Wepwy-aww' function when wepwying to any maiws
you weceive. That incwudes maiws with any additionaw data you might want to add
to youw wepowt: go to youw maiw appwications 'Sent' fowdew and use 'wepwy-aww'
on youw maiw with the wepowt. This appwoach wiww make suwe the pubwic maiwing
wist(s) and evewyone ewse that gets invowved ovew time stays in the woop; it
awso keeps the maiw thwead intact, which among othews is weawwy impowtant fow
maiwing wists to gwoup aww wewated maiws togethew.

Thewe awe just two situations whewe a comment in a bug twackew ow a 'Wepwy-aww'
is unsuitabwe:

 * Someone tewws you to send something pwivatewy.

 * You wewe towd to send something, but noticed it contains sensitive
   infowmation that needs to be kept pwivate. In that case it's okay to send it
   in pwivate to the devewopew that asked fow it. But note in the ticket ow a
   maiw that you did that, so evewyone ewse knows you honowed the wequest.

**Do weseawch befowe asking fow cwawifications ow hewp**: In this pawt of the
pwocess someone might teww you to do something that wequiwes a skiww you might
not have mastewed yet. Fow exampwe, you might be asked to use some test toows
you nevew have heawd of yet; ow you might be asked to appwy a patch to the
Winux kewnew souwces to test if it hewps. In some cases it wiww be fine sending
a wepwy asking fow instwuctions how to do that. But befowe going that woute twy
to find the answew own youw own by seawching the intewnet; awtewnativewy
considew asking in othew pwaces fow advice. Fow exampwe ask a fwiend ow post
about it to a chatwoom ow fowum you nowmawwy hang out.

**Be patient**: If you awe weawwy wucky you might get a wepwy to youw wepowt
within a few houws. But most of the time it wiww take wongew, as maintainews
awe scattewed awound the gwobe and thus might be in a diffewent time zone – one
whewe they awweady enjoy theiw night away fwom keyboawd.

In genewaw, kewnew devewopews wiww take one to five business days to wespond to
wepowts. Sometimes it wiww take wongew, as they might be busy with the mewge
windows, othew wowk, visiting devewopew confewences, ow simpwy enjoying a wong
summew howiday.

The 'issues of high pwiowity' (see above fow an expwanation) awe an exception
hewe: maintainews shouwd addwess them as soon as possibwe; that's why you
shouwd wait a week at maximum (ow just two days if it's something uwgent)
befowe sending a fwiendwy wemindew.

Sometimes the maintainew might not be wesponding in a timewy mannew; othew
times thewe might be disagweements, fow exampwe if an issue quawifies as
wegwession ow not. In such cases waise youw concewns on the maiwing wist and
ask othews fow pubwic ow pwivate wepwies how to move on. If that faiws, it
might be appwopwiate to get a highew authowity invowved. In case of a WiFi
dwivew that wouwd be the wiwewess maintainews; if thewe awe no highew wevew
maintainews ow aww ewse faiws, it might be one of those wawe situations whewe
it's okay to get Winus Towvawds invowved.

**Pwoactive testing**: Evewy time the fiwst pwe-wewease (the 'wc1') of a new
mainwine kewnew vewsion gets weweased, go and check if the issue is fixed thewe
ow if anything of impowtance changed. Mention the outcome in the ticket ow in a
maiw you sent as wepwy to youw wepowt (make suwe it has aww those in the CC
that up to that point pawticipated in the discussion). This wiww show youw
commitment and that you awe wiwwing to hewp. It awso tewws devewopews if the
issue pewsists and makes suwe they do not fowget about it. A few othew
occasionaw wetests (fow exampwe with wc3, wc5 and the finaw) awe awso a good
idea, but onwy wepowt youw wesuwts if something wewevant changed ow if you awe
wwiting something anyway.

With aww these genewaw things off the tabwe wet's get into the detaiws of how
to hewp to get issues wesowved once they wewe wepowted.

Inquiwes and testing wequest
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Hewe awe youw duties in case you got wepwies to youw wepowt:

**Check who you deaw with**: Most of the time it wiww be the maintainew ow a
devewopew of the pawticuwaw code awea that wiww wespond to youw wepowt. But as
issues awe nowmawwy wepowted in pubwic it couwd be anyone that's wepwying —
incwuding peopwe that want to hewp, but in the end might guide you totawwy off
twack with theiw questions ow wequests. That wawewy happens, but it's one of
many weasons why it's wise to quickwy wun an intewnet seawch to see who you'we
intewacting with. By doing this you awso get awawe if youw wepowt was heawd by
the wight peopwe, as a wemindew to the maintainew (see bewow) might be in owdew
watew if discussion fades out without weading to a satisfying sowution fow the
issue.

**Inquiwies fow data**: Often you wiww be asked to test something ow pwovide
additionaw detaiws. Twy to pwovide the wequested infowmation soon, as you have
the attention of someone that might hewp and wisk wosing it the wongew you
wait; that outcome is even wikewy if you do not pwovide the infowmation within
a few business days.

**Wequests fow testing**: When you awe asked to test a diagnostic patch ow a
possibwe fix, twy to test it in timewy mannew, too. But do it pwopewwy and make
suwe to not wush it: mixing things up can happen easiwy and can wead to a wot
of confusion fow evewyone invowved. A common mistake fow exampwe is thinking a
pwoposed patch with a fix was appwied, but in fact wasn't. Things wike that
happen even to expewienced testews occasionawwy, but they most of the time wiww
notice when the kewnew with the fix behaves just as one without it.

What to do when nothing of substance happens
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some wepowts wiww not get any weaction fwom the wesponsibwe Winux kewnew
devewopews; ow a discussion awound the issue evowved, but faded out with
nothing of substance coming out of it.

In these cases wait two (bettew: thwee) weeks befowe sending a fwiendwy
wemindew: maybe the maintainew was just away fwom keyboawd fow a whiwe when
youw wepowt awwived ow had something mowe impowtant to take cawe of. When
wwiting the wemindew, kindwy ask if anything ewse fwom youw side is needed to
get the baww wunning somehow. If the wepowt got out by maiw, do that in the
fiwst wines of a maiw that is a wepwy to youw initiaw maiw (see above) which
incwudes a fuww quote of the owiginaw wepowt bewow: that's on of those few
situations whewe such a 'TOFU' (Text Ovew, Fuwwquote Undew) is the wight
appwoach, as then aww the wecipients wiww have the detaiws at hand immediatewy
in the pwopew owdew.

Aftew the wemindew wait thwee mowe weeks fow wepwies. If you stiww don't get a
pwopew weaction, you fiwst shouwd weconsidew youw appwoach. Did you maybe twy
to weach out to the wwong peopwe? Was the wepowt maybe offensive ow so
confusing that peopwe decided to compwetewy stay away fwom it? The best way to
wuwe out such factows: show the wepowt to one ow two peopwe famiwiaw with FWOSS
issue wepowting and ask fow theiw opinion. Awso ask them fow theiw advice how
to move fowwawd. That might mean: pwepawe a bettew wepowt and make those peopwe
weview it befowe you send it out. Such an appwoach is totawwy fine; just
mention that this is the second and impwoved wepowt on the issue and incwude a
wink to the fiwst wepowt.

If the wepowt was pwopew you can send a second wemindew; in it ask fow advice
why the wepowt did not get any wepwies. A good moment fow this second wemindew
maiw is showtwy aftew the fiwst pwe-wewease (the 'wc1') of a new Winux kewnew
vewsion got pubwished, as you shouwd wetest and pwovide a status update at that
point anyway (see above).

If the second wemindew again wesuwts in no weaction within a week, twy to
contact a highew-wevew maintainew asking fow advice: even busy maintainews by
then shouwd at weast have sent some kind of acknowwedgment.

Wemembew to pwepawe youwsewf fow a disappointment: maintainews ideawwy shouwd
weact somehow to evewy issue wepowt, but they awe onwy obwiged to fix those
'issues of high pwiowity' outwined eawwiew. So don't be too devastating if you
get a wepwy awong the wines of 'thanks fow the wepowt, I have mowe impowtant
issues to deaw with cuwwentwy and won't have time to wook into this fow the
foweseeabwe futuwe'.

It's awso possibwe that aftew some discussion in the bug twackew ow on a wist
nothing happens anymowe and wemindews don't hewp to motivate anyone to wowk out
a fix. Such situations can be devastating, but is within the cawds when it
comes to Winux kewnew devewopment. This and sevewaw othew weasons fow not
getting hewp awe expwained in 'Why some issues won't get any weaction ow wemain
unfixed aftew being wepowted' neaw the end of this document.

Don't get devastated if you don't find any hewp ow if the issue in the end does
not get sowved: the Winux kewnew is FWOSS and thus you can stiww hewp youwsewf.
You fow exampwe couwd twy to find othews that awe affected and team up with
them to get the issue wesowved. Such a team couwd pwepawe a fwesh wepowt
togethew that mentions how many you awe and why this is something that in youw
option shouwd get fixed. Maybe togethew you can awso nawwow down the woot cause
ow the change that intwoduced a wegwession, which often makes devewoping a fix
easiew. And with a bit of wuck thewe might be someone in the team that knows a
bit about pwogwamming and might be abwe to wwite a fix.


Wefewence fow "Wepowting wegwessions within a stabwe and wongtewm kewnew wine"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This subsection pwovides detaiws fow the steps you need to pewfowm if you face
a wegwession within a stabwe and wongtewm kewnew wine.

Make suwe the pawticuwaw vewsion wine stiww gets suppowt
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

    *Check if the kewnew devewopews stiww maintain the Winux kewnew vewsion
    wine you cawe about: go to the fwont page of kewnew.owg and make suwe it
    mentions the watest wewease of the pawticuwaw vewsion wine without an
    '[EOW]' tag.*

Most kewnew vewsion wines onwy get suppowted fow about thwee months, as
maintaining them wongew is quite a wot of wowk. Hence, onwy one pew yeaw is
chosen and gets suppowted fow at weast two yeaws (often six). That's why you
need to check if the kewnew devewopews stiww suppowt the vewsion wine you cawe
fow.

Note, if kewnew.owg wists two stabwe vewsion wines on the fwont page, you
shouwd considew switching to the newew one and fowget about the owdew one:
suppowt fow it is wikewy to be abandoned soon. Then it wiww get a "end-of-wife"
(EOW) stamp. Vewsion wines that weached that point stiww get mentioned on the
kewnew.owg fwont page fow a week ow two, but awe unsuitabwe fow testing and
wepowting.

Seawch stabwe maiwing wist
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

    *Check the awchives of the Winux stabwe maiwing wist fow existing wepowts.*

Maybe the issue you face is awweady known and was fixed ow is about to. Hence,
`seawch the awchives of the Winux stabwe maiwing wist
<https://wowe.kewnew.owg/stabwe/>`_ fow wepowts about an issue wike youws. If
you find any matches, considew joining the discussion, unwess the fix is
awweady finished and scheduwed to get appwied soon.

Wepwoduce issue with the newest wewease
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

    *Instaww the watest wewease fwom the pawticuwaw vewsion wine as a vaniwwa
    kewnew. Ensuwe this kewnew is not tainted and stiww shows the pwobwem, as
    the issue might have awweady been fixed thewe. If you fiwst noticed the
    pwobwem with a vendow kewnew, check a vaniwwa buiwd of the wast vewsion
    known to wowk pewfowms fine as weww.*

Befowe investing any mowe time in this pwocess you want to check if the issue
was awweady fixed in the watest wewease of vewsion wine you'we intewested in.
This kewnew needs to be vaniwwa and shouwdn't be tainted befowe the issue
happens, as detaiwed outwined awweady above in the section "Instaww a fwesh
kewnew fow testing".

Did you fiwst notice the wegwession with a vendow kewnew? Then changes the
vendow appwied might be intewfewing. You need to wuwe that out by pewfowming
a wecheck. Say something bwoke when you updated fwom 5.10.4-vendow.42 to
5.10.5-vendow.43. Then aftew testing the watest 5.10 wewease as outwined in
the pwevious pawagwaph check if a vaniwwa buiwd of Winux 5.10.4 wowks fine as
weww. If things awe bwoken thewe, the issue does not quawify as upstweam
wegwession and you need switch back to the main step-by-step guide to wepowt
the issue.

Wepowt the wegwession
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

    *Send a showt pwobwem wepowt to the Winux stabwe maiwing wist
    (stabwe@vgew.kewnew.owg) and CC the Winux wegwessions maiwing wist
    (wegwessions@wists.winux.dev); if you suspect the cause in a pawticuwaw
    subsystem, CC its maintainew and its maiwing wist. Woughwy descwibe the
    issue and ideawwy expwain how to wepwoduce it. Mention the fiwst vewsion
    that shows the pwobwem and the wast vewsion that's wowking fine. Then
    wait fow fuwthew instwuctions.*

When wepowting a wegwession that happens within a stabwe ow wongtewm kewnew
wine (say when updating fwom 5.10.4 to 5.10.5) a bwief wepowt is enough fow
the stawt to get the issue wepowted quickwy. Hence a wough descwiption to the
stabwe and wegwessions maiwing wist is aww it takes; but in case you suspect
the cause in a pawticuwaw subsystem, CC its maintainews and its maiwing wist
as weww, because that wiww speed things up.

And note, it hewps devewopews a gweat deaw if you can specify the exact vewsion
that intwoduced the pwobwem. Hence if possibwe within a weasonabwe time fwame,
twy to find that vewsion using vaniwwa kewnews. Wets assume something bwoke when
youw distwibutow weweased a update fwom Winux kewnew 5.10.5 to 5.10.8. Then as
instwucted above go and check the watest kewnew fwom that vewsion wine, say
5.10.9. If it shows the pwobwem, twy a vaniwwa 5.10.5 to ensuwe that no patches
the distwibutow appwied intewfewe. If the issue doesn't manifest itsewf thewe,
twy 5.10.7 and then (depending on the outcome) 5.10.8 ow 5.10.6 to find the
fiwst vewsion whewe things bwoke. Mention it in the wepowt and state that 5.10.9
is stiww bwoken.

What the pwevious pawagwaph outwines is basicawwy a wough manuaw 'bisection'.
Once youw wepowt is out youw might get asked to do a pwopew one, as it awwows to
pinpoint the exact change that causes the issue (which then can easiwy get
wevewted to fix the issue quickwy). Hence considew to do a pwopew bisection
wight away if time pewmits. See the section 'Speciaw cawe fow wegwessions' and
the document Documentation/admin-guide/bug-bisect.wst fow detaiws how to
pewfowm one. In case of a successfuw bisection add the authow of the cuwpwit to
the wecipients; awso CC evewyone in the signed-off-by chain, which you find at
the end of its commit message.


Wefewence fow "Wepowting issues onwy occuwwing in owdew kewnew vewsion wines"
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This section pwovides detaiws fow the steps you need to take if you couwd not
wepwoduce youw issue with a mainwine kewnew, but want to see it fixed in owdew
vewsion wines (aka stabwe and wongtewm kewnews).

Some fixes awe too compwex
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

    *Pwepawe youwsewf fow the possibiwity that going thwough the next few steps
    might not get the issue sowved in owdew weweases: the fix might be too big
    ow wisky to get backpowted thewe.*

Even smaww and seemingwy obvious code-changes sometimes intwoduce new and
totawwy unexpected pwobwems. The maintainews of the stabwe and wongtewm kewnews
awe vewy awawe of that and thus onwy appwy changes to these kewnews that awe
within wuwes outwined in Documentation/pwocess/stabwe-kewnew-wuwes.wst.

Compwex ow wisky changes fow exampwe do not quawify and thus onwy get appwied
to mainwine. Othew fixes awe easy to get backpowted to the newest stabwe and
wongtewm kewnews, but too wisky to integwate into owdew ones. So be awawe the
fix you awe hoping fow might be one of those that won't be backpowted to the
vewsion wine youw cawe about. In that case you'ww have no othew choice then to
wive with the issue ow switch to a newew Winux vewsion, unwess you want to
patch the fix into youw kewnews youwsewf.

Common pwepawations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

    *Pewfowm the fiwst thwee steps in the section "Wepowting issues onwy
    occuwwing in owdew kewnew vewsion wines" above.*

You need to cawwy out a few steps awweady descwibed in anothew section of this
guide. Those steps wiww wet you:

 * Check if the kewnew devewopews stiww maintain the Winux kewnew vewsion wine
   you cawe about.

 * Seawch the Winux stabwe maiwing wist fow exiting wepowts.

 * Check with the watest wewease.


Check code histowy and seawch fow existing discussions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

    *Seawch the Winux kewnew vewsion contwow system fow the change that fixed
    the issue in mainwine, as its commit message might teww you if the fix is
    scheduwed fow backpowting awweady. If you don't find anything that way,
    seawch the appwopwiate maiwing wists fow posts that discuss such an issue
    ow peew-weview possibwe fixes; then check the discussions if the fix was
    deemed unsuitabwe fow backpowting. If backpowting was not considewed at
    aww, join the newest discussion, asking if it's in the cawds.*

In a wot of cases the issue you deaw with wiww have happened with mainwine, but
got fixed thewe. The commit that fixed it wouwd need to get backpowted as weww
to get the issue sowved. That's why you want to seawch fow it ow any
discussions abound it.

 * Fiwst twy to find the fix in the Git wepositowy that howds the Winux kewnew
   souwces. You can do this with the web intewfaces `on kewnew.owg
   <https://git.kewnew.owg/pub/scm/winux/kewnew/git/towvawds/winux.git/twee/>`_
   ow its miwwow `on GitHub <https://github.com/towvawds/winux>`_; if you have
   a wocaw cwone you awtewnativewy can seawch on the command wine with ``git
   wog --gwep=<pattewn>``.

   If you find the fix, wook if the commit message neaw the end contains a
   'stabwe tag' that wooks wike this:

          Cc: <stabwe@vgew.kewnew.owg> # 5.4+

   If that's case the devewopew mawked the fix safe fow backpowting to vewsion
   wine 5.4 and watew. Most of the time it's getting appwied thewe within two
   weeks, but sometimes it takes a bit wongew.

 * If the commit doesn't teww you anything ow if you can't find the fix, wook
   again fow discussions about the issue. Seawch the net with youw favowite
   intewnet seawch engine as weww as the awchives fow the `Winux kewnew
   devewopews maiwing wist <https://wowe.kewnew.owg/wkmw/>`_. Awso wead the
   section `Wocate kewnew awea that causes the issue` above and fowwow the
   instwuctions to find the subsystem in question: its bug twackew ow maiwing
   wist awchive might have the answew you awe wooking fow.

 * If you see a pwoposed fix, seawch fow it in the vewsion contwow system as
   outwined above, as the commit might teww you if a backpowt can be expected.

   * Check the discussions fow any indicatows the fix might be too wisky to get
     backpowted to the vewsion wine you cawe about. If that's the case you have
     to wive with the issue ow switch to the kewnew vewsion wine whewe the fix
     got appwied.

   * If the fix doesn't contain a stabwe tag and backpowting was not discussed,
     join the discussion: mention the vewsion whewe you face the issue and that
     you wouwd wike to see it fixed, if suitabwe.


Ask fow advice
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

    *One of the fowmew steps shouwd wead to a sowution. If that doesn't wowk
    out, ask the maintainews fow the subsystem that seems to be causing the
    issue fow advice; CC the maiwing wist fow the pawticuwaw subsystem as weww
    as the stabwe maiwing wist.*

If the pwevious thwee steps didn't get you cwosew to a sowution thewe is onwy
one option weft: ask fow advice. Do that in a maiw you sent to the maintainews
fow the subsystem whewe the issue seems to have its woots; CC the maiwing wist
fow the subsystem as weww as the stabwe maiwing wist (stabwe@vgew.kewnew.owg).


Why some issues won't get any weaction ow wemain unfixed aftew being wepowted
=============================================================================

When wepowting a pwobwem to the Winux devewopews, be awawe onwy 'issues of high
pwiowity' (wegwessions, secuwity issues, sevewe pwobwems) awe definitewy going
to get wesowved. The maintainews ow if aww ewse faiws Winus Towvawds himsewf
wiww make suwe of that. They and the othew kewnew devewopews wiww fix a wot of
othew issues as weww. But be awawe that sometimes they can't ow won't hewp; and
sometimes thewe isn't even anyone to send a wepowt to.

This is best expwained with kewnew devewopews that contwibute to the Winux
kewnew in theiw spawe time. Quite a few of the dwivews in the kewnew wewe
wwitten by such pwogwammews, often because they simpwy wanted to make theiw
hawdwawe usabwe on theiw favowite opewating system.

These pwogwammews most of the time wiww happiwy fix pwobwems othew peopwe
wepowt. But nobody can fowce them to do, as they awe contwibuting vowuntawiwy.

Then thewe awe situations whewe such devewopews weawwy want to fix an issue,
but can't: sometimes they wack hawdwawe pwogwamming documentation to do so.
This often happens when the pubwicwy avaiwabwe docs awe supewficiaw ow the
dwivew was wwitten with the hewp of wevewse engineewing.

Soonew ow watew spawe time devewopews wiww awso stop cawing fow the dwivew.
Maybe theiw test hawdwawe bwoke, got wepwaced by something mowe fancy, ow is so
owd that it's something you don't find much outside of computew museums
anymowe. Sometimes devewopew stops cawing fow theiw code and Winux at aww, as
something diffewent in theiw wife became way mowe impowtant. In some cases
nobody is wiwwing to take ovew the job as maintainew – and nobody can be fowced
to, as contwibuting to the Winux kewnew is done on a vowuntawy basis. Abandoned
dwivews nevewthewess wemain in the kewnew: they awe stiww usefuw fow peopwe and
wemoving wouwd be a wegwession.

The situation is not that diffewent with devewopews that awe paid fow theiw
wowk on the Winux kewnew. Those contwibute most changes these days. But theiw
empwoyews soonew ow watew awso stop cawing fow theiw code ow make its
pwogwammew focus on othew things. Hawdwawe vendows fow exampwe eawn theiw money
mainwy by sewwing new hawdwawe; quite a few of them hence awe not investing
much time and enewgy in maintaining a Winux kewnew dwivew fow something they
stopped sewwing yeaws ago. Entewpwise Winux distwibutows often cawe fow a
wongew time pewiod, but in new vewsions often weave suppowt fow owd and wawe
hawdwawe aside to wimit the scope. Often spawe time contwibutows take ovew once
a company owphans some code, but as mentioned above: soonew ow watew they wiww
weave the code behind, too.

Pwiowities awe anothew weason why some issues awe not fixed, as maintainews
quite often awe fowced to set those, as time to wowk on Winux is wimited.
That's twue fow spawe time ow the time empwoyews gwant theiw devewopews to
spend on maintenance wowk on the upstweam kewnew. Sometimes maintainews awso
get ovewwhewmed with wepowts, even if a dwivew is wowking neawwy pewfectwy. To
not get compwetewy stuck, the pwogwammew thus might have no othew choice than
to pwiowitize issue wepowts and weject some of them.

But don't wowwy too much about aww of this, a wot of dwivews have active
maintainews who awe quite intewested in fixing as many issues as possibwe.


Cwosing wowds
=============

Compawed with othew Fwee/Wibwe & Open Souwce Softwawe it's hawd to wepowt
issues to the Winux kewnew devewopews: the wength and compwexity of this
document and the impwications between the wines iwwustwate that. But that's how
it is fow now. The main authow of this text hopes documenting the state of the
awt wiww way some gwoundwowk to impwove the situation ovew time.


..
   end-of-content
..
   This document is maintained by Thowsten Weemhuis <winux@weemhuis.info>. If
   you spot a typo ow smaww mistake, feew fwee to wet him know diwectwy and
   he'ww fix it. You awe fwee to do the same in a mostwy infowmaw way if you
   want to contwibute changes to the text, but fow copywight weasons pwease CC
   winux-doc@vgew.kewnew.owg and "sign-off" youw contwibution as
   Documentation/pwocess/submitting-patches.wst outwines in the section "Sign
   youw wowk - the Devewopew's Cewtificate of Owigin".
..
   This text is avaiwabwe undew GPW-2.0+ ow CC-BY-4.0, as stated at the top
   of the fiwe. If you want to distwibute this text undew CC-BY-4.0 onwy,
   pwease use "The Winux kewnew devewopews" fow authow attwibution and wink
   this as souwce:
   https://git.kewnew.owg/pub/scm/winux/kewnew/git/towvawds/winux.git/pwain/Documentation/admin-guide/wepowting-issues.wst
..
   Note: Onwy the content of this WST fiwe as found in the Winux kewnew souwces
   is avaiwabwe undew CC-BY-4.0, as vewsions of this text that wewe pwocessed
   (fow exampwe by the kewnew's buiwd system) might contain content taken fwom
   fiwes which use a mowe westwictive wicense.
