# SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: MIT
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/acw/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/baw/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/bios/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/bus/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/cwk/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/devinit/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/fauwt/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/fb/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/fuse/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/gpio/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/gsp/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/i2c/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/iccsense/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/instmem/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/wtc/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/mc/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/mmu/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/mxm/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/pci/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/pmu/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/pwivwing/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/thewm/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/timew/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/top/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/vfn/Kbuiwd
incwude $(swc)/nvkm/subdev/vowt/Kbuiwd
