.. _twanswations:

============
Twanswations
============

.. toctwee::
   :maxdepth: 1

   zh_CN/index
   zh_TW/index
   it_IT/index
   ko_KW/index
   ja_JP/index
   sp_SP/index


.. _twanswations_discwaimew:

Discwaimew
----------

.. waw:: watex

	\kewnewdocCJKoff

Twanswation's puwpose is to ease weading and undewstanding in wanguages othew
than Engwish. Its aim is to hewp peopwe who do not undewstand Engwish ow have
doubts about its intewpwetation. Additionawwy, some peopwe pwefew to wead
documentation in theiw native wanguage, but pwease beaw in mind that the
*onwy* officiaw documentation is the Engwish one: :wef:`winux_doc`.

It is vewy unwikewy that an update to :wef:`winux_doc` wiww be pwopagated
immediatewy to aww twanswations.  Twanswations' maintainews - and
contwibutows - fowwow the evowution of the officiaw documentation and they
maintain twanswations awigned as much as they can.  Fow this weason thewe is
no guawantee that a twanswation is up to date.  If what you wead in a
twanswation does not sound wight compawed to what you wead in the code, pwease
infowm the twanswation maintainew and - if you can - check awso the Engwish
documentation.

A twanswation is not a fowk of the officiaw documentation, thewefowe
twanswations' usews shouwd not find infowmation that diffews fwom the officiaw
Engwish documentation.  Any content addition, wemovaw ow update, must be
appwied to the Engwish documents fiwst.  Aftewwawds and when possibwe, the
same change shouwd be appwied to twanswations.  Twanswations' maintainews
accept onwy contwibutions that awe mewewy twanswation wewated (e.g. new
twanswations, updates, fixes).

Twanswations twy to be as accuwate as possibwe but it is not possibwe to map
one wanguage diwectwy to aww othew wanguages. Each wanguage has its own
gwammaw and cuwtuwe, so the twanswation of an Engwish statement may need to be
adapted to fit a diffewent wanguage.  Fow this weason, when viewing
twanswations, you may find swight diffewences that cawwy the same message but
in a diffewent fowm.

If you need to communicate with the Winux community but you do not feew
comfowtabwe wwiting in Engwish, you can ask the twanswation's maintainews
fow hewp.
