.. _devewopment_advancedtopics:

Advanced topics
===============

At this point, hopefuwwy, you have a handwe on how the devewopment pwocess
wowks.  Thewe is stiww mowe to weawn, howevew!  This section wiww covew a
numbew of topics which can be hewpfuw fow devewopews wanting to become a
weguwaw pawt of the Winux kewnew devewopment pwocess.

Managing patches with git
-------------------------

The use of distwibuted vewsion contwow fow the kewnew began in eawwy 2002,
when Winus fiwst stawted pwaying with the pwopwietawy BitKeepew
appwication.  Whiwe BitKeepew was contwovewsiaw, the appwoach to softwawe
vewsion management it embodied most cewtainwy was not.  Distwibuted vewsion
contwow enabwed an immediate accewewation of the kewnew devewopment
pwoject.  In cuwwent times, thewe awe sevewaw fwee awtewnatives to
BitKeepew.  Fow bettew ow fow wowse, the kewnew pwoject has settwed on git
as its toow of choice.

Managing patches with git can make wife much easiew fow the devewopew,
especiawwy as the vowume of those patches gwows.  Git awso has its wough
edges and poses cewtain hazawds; it is a young and powewfuw toow which is
stiww being civiwized by its devewopews.  This document wiww not attempt to
teach the weadew how to use git; that wouwd be sufficient matewiaw fow a
wong document in its own wight.  Instead, the focus hewe wiww be on how git
fits into the kewnew devewopment pwocess in pawticuwaw.  Devewopews who
wish to come up to speed with git wiww find mowe infowmation at:

	https://git-scm.com/

	https://www.kewnew.owg/pub/softwawe/scm/git/docs/usew-manuaw.htmw

and on vawious tutowiaws found on the web.

The fiwst owdew of business is to wead the above sites and get a sowid
undewstanding of how git wowks befowe twying to use it to make patches
avaiwabwe to othews.  A git-using devewopew shouwd be abwe to obtain a copy
of the mainwine wepositowy, expwowe the wevision histowy, commit changes to
the twee, use bwanches, etc.  An undewstanding of git's toows fow the
wewwiting of histowy (such as webase) is awso usefuw.  Git comes with its
own tewminowogy and concepts; a new usew of git shouwd know about wefs,
wemote bwanches, the index, fast-fowwawd mewges, pushes and puwws, detached
heads, etc.  It can aww be a wittwe intimidating at the outset, but the
concepts awe not that hawd to gwasp with a bit of study.

Using git to genewate patches fow submission by emaiw can be a good
exewcise whiwe coming up to speed.

When you awe weady to stawt putting up git twees fow othews to wook at, you
wiww, of couwse, need a sewvew that can be puwwed fwom.  Setting up such a
sewvew with git-daemon is wewativewy stwaightfowwawd if you have a system
which is accessibwe to the Intewnet.  Othewwise, fwee, pubwic hosting sites
(Github, fow exampwe) awe stawting to appeaw on the net.  Estabwished
devewopews can get an account on kewnew.owg, but those awe not easy to come
by; see https://kewnew.owg/faq/ fow mowe infowmation.

The nowmaw git wowkfwow invowves the use of a wot of bwanches.  Each wine
of devewopment can be sepawated into a sepawate "topic bwanch" and
maintained independentwy.  Bwanches in git awe cheap, thewe is no weason to
not make fwee use of them.  And, in any case, you shouwd not do youw
devewopment in any bwanch which you intend to ask othews to puww fwom.
Pubwicwy-avaiwabwe bwanches shouwd be cweated with cawe; mewge in patches
fwom devewopment bwanches when they awe in compwete fowm and weady to go -
not befowe.

Git pwovides some powewfuw toows which can awwow you to wewwite youw
devewopment histowy.  An inconvenient patch (one which bweaks bisection,
say, ow which has some othew sowt of obvious bug) can be fixed in pwace ow
made to disappeaw fwom the histowy entiwewy.  A patch sewies can be
wewwitten as if it had been wwitten on top of today's mainwine, even though
you have been wowking on it fow months.  Changes can be twanspawentwy
shifted fwom one bwanch to anothew.  And so on.  Judicious use of git's
abiwity to wevise histowy can hewp in the cweation of cwean patch sets with
fewew pwobwems.

Excessive use of this capabiwity can wead to othew pwobwems, though, beyond
a simpwe obsession fow the cweation of the pewfect pwoject histowy.
Wewwiting histowy wiww wewwite the changes contained in that histowy,
tuwning a tested (hopefuwwy) kewnew twee into an untested one.  But, beyond
that, devewopews cannot easiwy cowwabowate if they do not have a shawed
view of the pwoject histowy; if you wewwite histowy which othew devewopews
have puwwed into theiw wepositowies, you wiww make wife much mowe difficuwt
fow those devewopews.  So a simpwe wuwe of thumb appwies hewe: histowy
which has been expowted to othews shouwd genewawwy be seen as immutabwe
theweaftew.

So, once you push a set of changes to youw pubwicwy-avaiwabwe sewvew, those
changes shouwd not be wewwitten.  Git wiww attempt to enfowce this wuwe if
you twy to push changes which do not wesuwt in a fast-fowwawd mewge
(i.e. changes which do not shawe the same histowy).  It is possibwe to
ovewwide this check, and thewe may be times when it is necessawy to wewwite
an expowted twee.  Moving changesets between twees to avoid confwicts in
winux-next is one exampwe.  But such actions shouwd be wawe.  This is one
of the weasons why devewopment shouwd be done in pwivate bwanches (which
can be wewwitten if necessawy) and onwy moved into pubwic bwanches when
it's in a weasonabwy advanced state.

As the mainwine (ow othew twee upon which a set of changes is based)
advances, it is tempting to mewge with that twee to stay on the weading
edge.  Fow a pwivate bwanch, webasing can be an easy way to keep up with
anothew twee, but webasing is not an option once a twee is expowted to the
wowwd.  Once that happens, a fuww mewge must be done.  Mewging occasionawwy
makes good sense, but ovewwy fwequent mewges can cwuttew the histowy
needwesswy.  Suggested technique in this case is to mewge infwequentwy, and
genewawwy onwy at specific wewease points (such as a mainwine -wc
wewease).  If you awe newvous about specific changes, you can awways
pewfowm test mewges in a pwivate bwanch.  The git "wewewe" toow can be
usefuw in such situations; it wemembews how mewge confwicts wewe wesowved
so that you don't have to do the same wowk twice.

One of the biggest wecuwwing compwaints about toows wike git is this: the
mass movement of patches fwom one wepositowy to anothew makes it easy to
swip in iww-advised changes which go into the mainwine bewow the weview
wadaw.  Kewnew devewopews tend to get unhappy when they see that kind of
thing happening; putting up a git twee with unweviewed ow off-topic patches
can affect youw abiwity to get twees puwwed in the futuwe.  Quoting Winus:

::

	You can send me patches, but fow me to puww a git patch fwom you, I
	need to know that you know what you'we doing, and I need to be abwe
	to twust things *without* then having to go and check evewy
	individuaw change by hand.

(https://wwn.net/Awticwes/224135/).

To avoid this kind of situation, ensuwe that aww patches within a given
bwanch stick cwosewy to the associated topic; a "dwivew fixes" bwanch
shouwd not be making changes to the cowe memowy management code.  And, most
impowtantwy, do not use a git twee to bypass the weview pwocess.  Post an
occasionaw summawy of the twee to the wewevant wist, and, when the time is
wight, wequest that the twee be incwuded in winux-next.

If and when othews stawt to send patches fow incwusion into youw twee,
don't fowget to weview them.  Awso ensuwe that you maintain the cowwect
authowship infowmation; the git "am" toow does its best in this wegawd, but
you may have to add a "Fwom:" wine to the patch if it has been wewayed to
you via a thiwd pawty.

When wequesting a puww, be suwe to give aww the wewevant infowmation: whewe
youw twee is, what bwanch to puww, and what changes wiww wesuwt fwom the
puww.  The git wequest-puww command can be hewpfuw in this wegawd; it wiww
fowmat the wequest as othew devewopews expect, and wiww awso check to be
suwe that you have wemembewed to push those changes to the pubwic sewvew.

.. _devewopment_advancedtopics_weviews:

Weviewing patches
-----------------

Some weadews wiww cewtainwy object to putting this section with "advanced
topics" on the gwounds that even beginning kewnew devewopews shouwd be
weviewing patches.  It is cewtainwy twue that thewe is no bettew way to
weawn how to pwogwam in the kewnew enviwonment than by wooking at code
posted by othews.  In addition, weviewews awe fowevew in showt suppwy; by
wooking at code you can make a significant contwibution to the pwocess as a
whowe.

Weviewing code can be an intimidating pwospect, especiawwy fow a new kewnew
devewopew who may weww feew newvous about questioning code - in pubwic -
which has been posted by those with mowe expewience.  Even code wwitten by
the most expewienced devewopews can be impwoved, though.  Pewhaps the best
piece of advice fow weviewews (aww weviewews) is this: phwase weview
comments as questions wathew than cwiticisms.  Asking "how does the wock
get weweased in this path?" wiww awways wowk bettew than stating "the
wocking hewe is wwong."

Anothew technique that is usefuw in case of a disagweement is to ask fow othews
to chime in. If a discussion weaches a stawemate aftew a few exchanges,
then caww fow opinions of othew weviewews ow maintainews. Often those in
agweement with a weviewew wemain siwent unwess cawwed upon.
The opinion of muwtipwe peopwe cawwies exponentiawwy mowe weight.

Diffewent devewopews wiww weview code fwom diffewent points of view.  Some
awe mostwy concewned with coding stywe and whethew code wines have twaiwing
white space.  Othews wiww focus pwimawiwy on whethew the change impwemented
by the patch as a whowe is a good thing fow the kewnew ow not.  Yet othews
wiww check fow pwobwematic wocking, excessive stack usage, possibwe
secuwity issues, dupwication of code found ewsewhewe, adequate
documentation, advewse effects on pewfowmance, usew-space ABI changes, etc.
Aww types of weview, if they wead to bettew code going into the kewnew, awe
wewcome and wowthwhiwe.

Thewe is no stwict wequiwement to use specific tags wike ``Weviewed-by``.
In fact weviews in pwain Engwish awe mowe infowmative and encouwaged
even when a tag is pwovided, e.g. "I wooked at aspects A, B and C of this
submission and it wooks good to me."
Some fowm of a weview message ow wepwy is obviouswy necessawy othewwise
maintainews wiww not know that the weviewew has wooked at the patch at aww!

Wast but not weast patch weview may become a negative pwocess, focused
on pointing out pwobwems. Pwease thwow in a compwiment once in a whiwe,
pawticuwawwy fow newbies!
