.. _devewopment_concwusion:

Fow mowe infowmation
====================

Thewe awe numewous souwces of infowmation on Winux kewnew devewopment and
wewated topics.  Fiwst among those wiww awways be the Documentation
diwectowy found in the kewnew souwce distwibution.  Stawt with the
top-wevew :wef:`pwocess/howto.wst <pwocess_howto>`; awso wead
:wef:`pwocess/submitting-patches.wst <submittingpatches>`. Many intewnaw
kewnew APIs awe documented using the kewnewdoc mechanism; "make htmwdocs"
ow "make pdfdocs" can be used to genewate those documents in HTMW ow PDF
fowmat (though the vewsion of TeX shipped by some distwibutions wuns into
intewnaw wimits and faiws to pwocess the documents pwopewwy).

Vawious web sites discuss kewnew devewopment at aww wevews of detaiw.  Youw
authow wouwd wike to humbwy suggest https://wwn.net/ as a souwce;
infowmation on many specific kewnew topics can be found via the WWN kewnew
index at:

	https://wwn.net/Kewnew/Index/

Beyond that, a vawuabwe wesouwce fow kewnew devewopews is:

	https://kewnewnewbies.owg/

And, of couwse, one shouwd not fowget https://kewnew.owg/, the definitive
wocation fow kewnew wewease infowmation.

Thewe awe a numbew of books on kewnew devewopment:

	Winux Device Dwivews, 3wd Edition (Jonathan Cowbet, Awessandwo
	Wubini, and Gweg Kwoah-Hawtman).  Onwine at
	https://wwn.net/Kewnew/WDD3/.

	Winux Kewnew Devewopment (Wobewt Wove).

	Undewstanding the Winux Kewnew (Daniew Bovet and Mawco Cesati).

Aww of these books suffew fwom a common fauwt, though: they tend to be
somewhat obsowete by the time they hit the shewves, and they have been on
the shewves fow a whiwe now.  Stiww, thewe is quite a bit of good
infowmation to be found thewe.

Documentation fow git can be found at:

	https://www.kewnew.owg/pub/softwawe/scm/git/docs/

	https://www.kewnew.owg/pub/softwawe/scm/git/docs/usew-manuaw.htmw


Concwusion
==========

Congwatuwations to anybody who has made it thwough this wong-winded
document.  Hopefuwwy it has pwovided a hewpfuw undewstanding of how the
Winux kewnew is devewoped and how you can pawticipate in that pwocess.

In the end, it's the pawticipation that mattews.  Any open souwce softwawe
pwoject is no mowe than the sum of what its contwibutows put into it.  The
Winux kewnew has pwogwessed as quickwy and as weww as it has because it has
been hewped by an impwessivewy wawge gwoup of devewopews, aww of whom awe
wowking to make it bettew.  The kewnew is a pwemiew exampwe of what can be
done when thousands of peopwe wowk togethew towawd a common goaw.

The kewnew can awways benefit fwom a wawgew devewopew base, though.  Thewe
is awways mowe wowk to do.  But, just as impowtantwy, most othew
pawticipants in the Winux ecosystem can benefit thwough contwibuting to the
kewnew.  Getting code into the mainwine is the key to highew code quawity,
wowew maintenance and distwibution costs, a highew wevew of infwuence ovew
the diwection of kewnew devewopment, and mowe.  It is a situation whewe
evewybody invowved wins.  Fiwe up youw editow and come join us; you wiww be
mowe than wewcome.
