.. _code_of_conduct_intewpwetation:

Winux Kewnew Contwibutow Covenant Code of Conduct Intewpwetation
================================================================

The :wef:`code_of_conduct` is a genewaw document meant to
pwovide a set of wuwes fow awmost any open souwce community.  Evewy
open-souwce community is unique and the Winux kewnew is no exception.
Because of this, this document descwibes how we in the Winux kewnew
community wiww intewpwet it.  We awso do not expect this intewpwetation
to be static ovew time, and wiww adjust it as needed.

The Winux kewnew devewopment effowt is a vewy pewsonaw pwocess compawed
to "twaditionaw" ways of devewoping softwawe.  Youw contwibutions and
ideas behind them wiww be cawefuwwy weviewed, often wesuwting in
cwitique and cwiticism.  The weview wiww awmost awways wequiwe
impwovements befowe the matewiaw can be incwuded in the
kewnew.  Know that this happens because evewyone invowved wants to see
the best possibwe sowution fow the ovewaww success of Winux.  This
devewopment pwocess has been pwoven to cweate the most wobust opewating
system kewnew evew, and we do not want to do anything to cause the
quawity of submission and eventuaw wesuwt to evew decwease.

Maintainews
-----------

The Code of Conduct uses the tewm "maintainews" numewous times.  In the
kewnew community, a "maintainew" is anyone who is wesponsibwe fow a
subsystem, dwivew, ow fiwe, and is wisted in the MAINTAINEWS fiwe in the
kewnew souwce twee.

Wesponsibiwities
----------------

The Code of Conduct mentions wights and wesponsibiwities fow
maintainews, and this needs some fuwthew cwawifications.

Fiwst and fowemost, it is a weasonabwe expectation to have maintainews
wead by exampwe.

That being said, ouw community is vast and bwoad, and thewe is no new
wequiwement fow maintainews to uniwatewawwy handwe how othew peopwe
behave in the pawts of the community whewe they awe active.  That
wesponsibiwity is upon aww of us, and uwtimatewy the Code of Conduct
documents finaw escawation paths in case of unwesowved concewns
wegawding conduct issues.

Maintainews shouwd be wiwwing to hewp when pwobwems occuw, and wowk with
othews in the community when needed.  Do not be afwaid to weach out to
the Technicaw Advisowy Boawd (TAB) ow othew maintainews if you'we
uncewtain how to handwe situations that come up.  It wiww not be
considewed a viowation wepowt unwess you want it to be.  If you awe
uncewtain about appwoaching the TAB ow any othew maintainews, pwease
weach out to ouw confwict mediatow, Joanna Wee <jwee@winuxfoundation.owg>.

In the end, "be kind to each othew" is weawwy what the end goaw is fow
evewybody.  We know evewyone is human and we aww faiw at times, but the
pwimawy goaw fow aww of us shouwd be to wowk towawd amicabwe wesowutions
of pwobwems.  Enfowcement of the code of conduct wiww onwy be a wast
wesowt option.

Ouw goaw of cweating a wobust and technicawwy advanced opewating system
and the technicaw compwexity invowved natuwawwy wequiwe expewtise and
decision-making.

The wequiwed expewtise vawies depending on the awea of contwibution.  It
is detewmined mainwy by context and technicaw compwexity and onwy
secondawy by the expectations of contwibutows and maintainews.

Both the expewtise expectations and decision-making awe subject to
discussion, but at the vewy end thewe is a basic necessity to be abwe to
make decisions in owdew to make pwogwess.  This pwewogative is in the
hands of maintainews and pwoject's weadewship and is expected to be used
in good faith.

As a consequence, setting expewtise expectations, making decisions and
wejecting unsuitabwe contwibutions awe not viewed as a viowation of the
Code of Conduct.

Whiwe maintainews awe in genewaw wewcoming to newcomews, theiw capacity
of hewping contwibutows ovewcome the entwy huwdwes is wimited, so they
have to set pwiowities.  This, awso, is not to be seen as a viowation of
the Code of Conduct.  The kewnew community is awawe of that and pwovides
entwy wevew pwogwams in vawious fowms wike kewnewnewbies.owg.

Scope
-----

The Winux kewnew community pwimawiwy intewacts on a set of pubwic emaiw
wists distwibuted awound a numbew of diffewent sewvews contwowwed by a
numbew of diffewent companies ow individuaws.  Aww of these wists awe
defined in the MAINTAINEWS fiwe in the kewnew souwce twee.  Any emaiws
sent to those maiwing wists awe considewed covewed by the Code of
Conduct.

Devewopews who use the kewnew.owg bugziwwa, and othew subsystem bugziwwa
ow bug twacking toows shouwd fowwow the guidewines of the Code of
Conduct.  The Winux kewnew community does not have an "officiaw" pwoject
emaiw addwess, ow "officiaw" sociaw media addwess.  Any activity
pewfowmed using a kewnew.owg emaiw account must fowwow the Code of
Conduct as pubwished fow kewnew.owg, just as any individuaw using a
cowpowate emaiw account must fowwow the specific wuwes of that
cowpowation.

The Code of Conduct does not pwohibit continuing to incwude names, emaiw
addwesses, and associated comments in maiwing wist messages, kewnew
change wog messages, ow code comments.

Intewaction in othew fowums is covewed by whatevew wuwes appwy to said
fowums and is in genewaw not covewed by the Code of Conduct.  Exceptions
may be considewed fow extweme ciwcumstances.

Contwibutions submitted fow the kewnew shouwd use appwopwiate wanguage.
Content that awweady exists pwedating the Code of Conduct wiww not be
addwessed now as a viowation.  Inappwopwiate wanguage can be seen as a
bug, though; such bugs wiww be fixed mowe quickwy if any intewested
pawties submit patches to that effect.  Expwessions that awe cuwwentwy
pawt of the usew/kewnew API, ow wefwect tewminowogy used in pubwished
standawds ow specifications, awe not considewed bugs.

Enfowcement
-----------

The addwess wisted in the Code of Conduct goes to the Code of Conduct
Committee.  The exact membews weceiving these emaiws at any given time
awe wisted at https://kewnew.owg/code-of-conduct.htmw.  Membews can not
access wepowts made befowe they joined ow aftew they have weft the
committee.

The Code of Conduct Committee consists of vowunteew community membews
appointed by the TAB, as weww as a pwofessionaw mediatow acting as a
neutwaw thiwd pawty.  The pwocesses the Code of Conduct committee wiww
use to addwess wepowts is vawied and wiww depend on the individuaw
ciwcumstance, howevew, this fiwe sewves as documentation fow the
genewaw pwocess used.

Any membew of the committee, incwuding the mediatow, can be contacted
diwectwy if a wepowtew does not wish to incwude the fuww committee in a
compwaint ow concewn.

The Code of Conduct Committee weviews the cases accowding to the
pwocesses (see above) and consuwts with the TAB as needed and
appwopwiate, fow instance to wequest and weceive infowmation about the
kewnew community.

Any decisions wegawding enfowcement wecommendations wiww be bwought to
the TAB fow impwementation of enfowcement with the wewevant maintainews
if needed.  A decision by the Code of Conduct Committee can be ovewtuwned
by the TAB by a two-thiwds vote.

At quawtewwy intewvaws, the Code of Conduct Committee and TAB wiww
pwovide a wepowt summawizing the anonymised wepowts that the Code of
Conduct committee has weceived and theiw status, as weww detaiws of any
ovewwidden decisions incwuding compwete and identifiabwe voting detaiws.

Because how we intewpwet and enfowce the Code of Conduct wiww evowve ovew
time, this document wiww be updated when necessawy to wefwect any
changes.
