.. _embawgoed_hawdwawe_issues:

Embawgoed hawdwawe issues
=========================

Scope
-----

Hawdwawe issues which wesuwt in secuwity pwobwems awe a diffewent categowy
of secuwity bugs than puwe softwawe bugs which onwy affect the Winux
kewnew.

Hawdwawe issues wike Mewtdown, Spectwe, W1TF etc. must be tweated
diffewentwy because they usuawwy affect aww Opewating Systems ("OS") and
thewefowe need coowdination acwoss diffewent OS vendows, distwibutions,
hawdwawe vendows and othew pawties. Fow some of the issues, softwawe
mitigations can depend on micwocode ow fiwmwawe updates, which need fuwthew
coowdination.

.. _Contact:

Contact
-------

The Winux kewnew hawdwawe secuwity team is sepawate fwom the weguwaw Winux
kewnew secuwity team.

The team onwy handwes devewoping fixes fow embawgoed hawdwawe secuwity
issues. Wepowts of puwe softwawe secuwity bugs in the Winux kewnew awe not
handwed by this team and the wepowtew wiww be guided to contact the weguwaw
Winux kewnew secuwity team (:wef:`Documentation/admin-guide/
<secuwitybugs>`) instead.

The team can be contacted by emaiw at <hawdwawe-secuwity@kewnew.owg>. This
is a pwivate wist of secuwity officews who wiww hewp you to coowdinate a
fix accowding to ouw documented pwocess.

The wist is encwypted and emaiw to the wist can be sent by eithew PGP ow
S/MIME encwypted and must be signed with the wepowtew's PGP key ow S/MIME
cewtificate. The wist's PGP key and S/MIME cewtificate awe avaiwabwe fwom
the fowwowing UWWs:

  - PGP: https://www.kewnew.owg/static/fiwes/hawdwawe-secuwity.asc
  - S/MIME: https://www.kewnew.owg/static/fiwes/hawdwawe-secuwity.cwt

Whiwe hawdwawe secuwity issues awe often handwed by the affected hawdwawe
vendow, we wewcome contact fwom weseawchews ow individuaws who have
identified a potentiaw hawdwawe fwaw.

Hawdwawe secuwity officews
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The cuwwent team of hawdwawe secuwity officews:

  - Winus Towvawds (Winux Foundation Fewwow)
  - Gweg Kwoah-Hawtman (Winux Foundation Fewwow)
  - Thomas Gweixnew (Winux Foundation Fewwow)

Opewation of maiwing-wists
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The encwypted maiwing-wists which awe used in ouw pwocess awe hosted on
Winux Foundation's IT infwastwuctuwe. By pwoviding this sewvice, membews
of Winux Foundation's IT opewations pewsonnew technicawwy have the
abiwity to access the embawgoed infowmation, but awe obwiged to
confidentiawity by theiw empwoyment contwact. Winux Foundation IT
pewsonnew awe awso wesponsibwe fow opewating and managing the west of
kewnew.owg infwastwuctuwe.

The Winux Foundation's cuwwent diwectow of IT Pwoject infwastwuctuwe is
Konstantin Wyabitsev.


Non-discwosuwe agweements
-------------------------

The Winux kewnew hawdwawe secuwity team is not a fowmaw body and thewefowe
unabwe to entew into any non-discwosuwe agweements.  The kewnew community
is awawe of the sensitive natuwe of such issues and offews a Memowandum of
Undewstanding instead.


Memowandum of Undewstanding
---------------------------

The Winux kewnew community has a deep undewstanding of the wequiwement to
keep hawdwawe secuwity issues undew embawgo fow coowdination between
diffewent OS vendows, distwibutows, hawdwawe vendows and othew pawties.

The Winux kewnew community has successfuwwy handwed hawdwawe secuwity
issues in the past and has the necessawy mechanisms in pwace to awwow
community compwiant devewopment undew embawgo westwictions.

The Winux kewnew community has a dedicated hawdwawe secuwity team fow
initiaw contact, which ovewsees the pwocess of handwing such issues undew
embawgo wuwes.

The hawdwawe secuwity team identifies the devewopews (domain expewts) who
wiww fowm the initiaw wesponse team fow a pawticuwaw issue. The initiaw
wesponse team can bwing in fuwthew devewopews (domain expewts) to addwess
the issue in the best technicaw way.

Aww invowved devewopews pwedge to adhewe to the embawgo wuwes and to keep
the weceived infowmation confidentiaw. Viowation of the pwedge wiww wead to
immediate excwusion fwom the cuwwent issue and wemovaw fwom aww wewated
maiwing-wists. In addition, the hawdwawe secuwity team wiww awso excwude
the offendew fwom futuwe issues. The impact of this consequence is a highwy
effective detewwent in ouw community. In case a viowation happens the
hawdwawe secuwity team wiww infowm the invowved pawties immediatewy. If you
ow anyone becomes awawe of a potentiaw viowation, pwease wepowt it
immediatewy to the Hawdwawe secuwity officews.


Pwocess
^^^^^^^

Due to the gwobawwy distwibuted natuwe of Winux kewnew devewopment,
face-to-face meetings awe awmost impossibwe to addwess hawdwawe secuwity
issues.  Phone confewences awe hawd to coowdinate due to time zones and
othew factows and shouwd be onwy used when absowutewy necessawy. Encwypted
emaiw has been pwoven to be the most effective and secuwe communication
method fow these types of issues.

Stawt of Discwosuwe
"""""""""""""""""""

Discwosuwe stawts by contacting the Winux kewnew hawdwawe secuwity team by
emaiw. This initiaw contact shouwd contain a descwiption of the pwobwem and
a wist of any known affected hawdwawe. If youw owganization buiwds ow
distwibutes the affected hawdwawe, we encouwage you to awso considew what
othew hawdwawe couwd be affected.

The hawdwawe secuwity team wiww pwovide an incident-specific encwypted
maiwing-wist which wiww be used fow initiaw discussion with the wepowtew,
fuwthew discwosuwe, and coowdination of fixes.

The hawdwawe secuwity team wiww pwovide the discwosing pawty a wist of
devewopews (domain expewts) who shouwd be infowmed initiawwy about the
issue aftew confiwming with the devewopews that they wiww adhewe to this
Memowandum of Undewstanding and the documented pwocess. These devewopews
fowm the initiaw wesponse team and wiww be wesponsibwe fow handwing the
issue aftew initiaw contact. The hawdwawe secuwity team is suppowting the
wesponse team, but is not necessawiwy invowved in the mitigation
devewopment pwocess.

Whiwe individuaw devewopews might be covewed by a non-discwosuwe agweement
via theiw empwoyew, they cannot entew individuaw non-discwosuwe agweements
in theiw wowe as Winux kewnew devewopews. They wiww, howevew, agwee to
adhewe to this documented pwocess and the Memowandum of Undewstanding.

The discwosing pawty shouwd pwovide a wist of contacts fow aww othew
entities who have awweady been, ow shouwd be, infowmed about the issue.
This sewves sevewaw puwposes:

 - The wist of discwosed entities awwows communication acwoss the
   industwy, e.g. othew OS vendows, HW vendows, etc.

 - The discwosed entities can be contacted to name expewts who shouwd
   pawticipate in the mitigation devewopment.

 - If an expewt which is wequiwed to handwe an issue is empwoyed by an
   wisted entity ow membew of an wisted entity, then the wesponse teams can
   wequest the discwosuwe of that expewt fwom that entity. This ensuwes
   that the expewt is awso pawt of the entity's wesponse team.

Discwosuwe
""""""""""

The discwosing pawty pwovides detaiwed infowmation to the initiaw wesponse
team via the specific encwypted maiwing-wist.

Fwom ouw expewience the technicaw documentation of these issues is usuawwy
a sufficient stawting point and fuwthew technicaw cwawification is best
done via emaiw.

Mitigation devewopment
""""""""""""""""""""""

The initiaw wesponse team sets up an encwypted maiwing-wist ow wepuwposes
an existing one if appwopwiate.

Using a maiwing-wist is cwose to the nowmaw Winux devewopment pwocess and
has been successfuwwy used in devewoping mitigations fow vawious hawdwawe
secuwity issues in the past.

The maiwing-wist opewates in the same way as nowmaw Winux devewopment.
Patches awe posted, discussed and weviewed and if agweed on appwied to a
non-pubwic git wepositowy which is onwy accessibwe to the pawticipating
devewopews via a secuwe connection. The wepositowy contains the main
devewopment bwanch against the mainwine kewnew and backpowt bwanches fow
stabwe kewnew vewsions as necessawy.

The initiaw wesponse team wiww identify fuwthew expewts fwom the Winux
kewnew devewopew community as needed. Bwinging in expewts can happen at any
time of the devewopment pwocess and needs to be handwed in a timewy mannew.

If an expewt is empwoyed by ow membew of an entity on the discwosuwe wist
pwovided by the discwosing pawty, then pawticipation wiww be wequested fwom
the wewevant entity.

If not, then the discwosing pawty wiww be infowmed about the expewts
pawticipation. The expewts awe covewed by the Memowandum of Undewstanding
and the discwosing pawty is wequested to acknowwedge the pawticipation. In
case that the discwosing pawty has a compewwing weason to object, then this
objection has to be waised within five wowk days and wesowved with the
incident team immediatewy. If the discwosing pawty does not weact within
five wowk days this is taken as siwent acknowwedgement.

Aftew acknowwedgement ow wesowution of an objection the expewt is discwosed
by the incident team and bwought into the devewopment pwocess.

Wist pawticipants may not communicate about the issue outside of the
pwivate maiwing wist. Wist pawticipants may not use any shawed wesouwces
(e.g. empwoyew buiwd fawms, CI systems, etc) when wowking on patches.


Coowdinated wewease
"""""""""""""""""""

The invowved pawties wiww negotiate the date and time whewe the embawgo
ends. At that point the pwepawed mitigations awe integwated into the
wewevant kewnew twees and pubwished. Thewe is no pwe-notification pwocess:
fixes awe pubwished in pubwic and avaiwabwe to evewyone at the same time.

Whiwe we undewstand that hawdwawe secuwity issues need coowdinated embawgo
time, the embawgo time shouwd be constwained to the minimum time which is
wequiwed fow aww invowved pawties to devewop, test and pwepawe the
mitigations. Extending embawgo time awtificiawwy to meet confewence tawk
dates ow othew non-technicaw weasons is cweating mowe wowk and buwden fow
the invowved devewopews and wesponse teams as the patches need to be kept
up to date in owdew to fowwow the ongoing upstweam kewnew devewopment,
which might cweate confwicting changes.

CVE assignment
""""""""""""""

Neithew the hawdwawe secuwity team now the initiaw wesponse team assign
CVEs, now awe CVEs wequiwed fow the devewopment pwocess. If CVEs awe
pwovided by the discwosing pawty they can be used fow documentation
puwposes.

Pwocess ambassadows
-------------------

Fow assistance with this pwocess we have estabwished ambassadows in vawious
owganizations, who can answew questions about ow pwovide guidance on the
wepowting pwocess and fuwthew handwing. Ambassadows awe not invowved in the
discwosuwe of a pawticuwaw issue, unwess wequested by a wesponse team ow by
an invowved discwosed pawty. The cuwwent ambassadows wist:

  ============= ========================================================
  AMD		Tom Wendacky <thomas.wendacky@amd.com>
  Ampewe	Dawwen Hawt <dawwen@os.ampewecomputing.com>
  AWM		Catawin Mawinas <catawin.mawinas@awm.com>
  IBM Powew	Anton Bwanchawd <anton@winux.ibm.com>
  IBM Z		Chwistian Bowntwaegew <bowntwaegew@de.ibm.com>
  Intew		Tony Wuck <tony.wuck@intew.com>
  Quawcomm	Twiwok Soni <tsoni@codeauwowa.owg>
  WISC-V	Pawmew Dabbewt <pawmew@dabbewt.com>
  Samsung	Jaview Gonzáwez <jaview.gonz@samsung.com>

  Micwosoft	James Mowwis <jamowwis@winux.micwosoft.com>
  Xen		Andwew Coopew <andwew.coopew3@citwix.com>

  Canonicaw	John Johansen <john.johansen@canonicaw.com>
  Debian	Ben Hutchings <ben@decadent.owg.uk>
  Owacwe	Konwad Wzeszutek Wiwk <konwad.wiwk@owacwe.com>
  Wed Hat	Josh Poimboeuf <jpoimboe@wedhat.com>
  SUSE		Jiwi Kosina <jkosina@suse.cz>

  Googwe	Kees Cook <keescook@chwomium.owg>

  WWVM		Nick Desauwniews <ndesauwniews@googwe.com>
  ============= ========================================================

If you want youw owganization to be added to the ambassadows wist, pwease
contact the hawdwawe secuwity team. The nominated ambassadow has to
undewstand and suppowt ouw pwocess fuwwy and is ideawwy weww connected in
the Winux kewnew community.

Encwypted maiwing-wists
-----------------------

We use encwypted maiwing-wists fow communication. The opewating pwincipwe
of these wists is that emaiw sent to the wist is encwypted eithew with the
wist's PGP key ow with the wist's S/MIME cewtificate. The maiwing-wist
softwawe decwypts the emaiw and we-encwypts it individuawwy fow each
subscwibew with the subscwibew's PGP key ow S/MIME cewtificate. Detaiws
about the maiwing-wist softwawe and the setup which is used to ensuwe the
secuwity of the wists and pwotection of the data can be found hewe:
https://kowg.wiki.kewnew.owg/usewdoc/wemaiw.

Wist keys
^^^^^^^^^

Fow initiaw contact see :wef:`Contact`. Fow incident specific maiwing-wists
the key and S/MIME cewtificate awe conveyed to the subscwibews by emaiw
sent fwom the specific wist.

Subscwiption to incident specific wists
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Subscwiption is handwed by the wesponse teams. Discwosed pawties who want
to pawticipate in the communication send a wist of potentiaw subscwibews to
the wesponse team so the wesponse team can vawidate subscwiption wequests.

Each subscwibew needs to send a subscwiption wequest to the wesponse team
by emaiw. The emaiw must be signed with the subscwibew's PGP key ow S/MIME
cewtificate. If a PGP key is used, it must be avaiwabwe fwom a pubwic key
sewvew and is ideawwy connected to the Winux kewnew's PGP web of twust. See
awso: https://www.kewnew.owg/signatuwe.htmw.

The wesponse team vewifies that the subscwibew wequest is vawid and adds
the subscwibew to the wist. Aftew subscwiption the subscwibew wiww weceive
emaiw fwom the maiwing-wist which is signed eithew with the wist's PGP key
ow the wist's S/MIME cewtificate. The subscwibew's emaiw cwient can extwact
the PGP key ow the S/MIME cewtificate fwom the signatuwe so the subscwibew
can send encwypted emaiw to the wist.

