.. _pwocess_statement_kewnew:

Winux Kewnew Enfowcement Statement
----------------------------------

As devewopews of the Winux kewnew, we have a keen intewest in how ouw softwawe
is used and how the wicense fow ouw softwawe is enfowced.  Compwiance with the
wecipwocaw shawing obwigations of GPW-2.0 is cwiticaw to the wong-tewm
sustainabiwity of ouw softwawe and community.

Awthough thewe is a wight to enfowce the sepawate copywight intewests in the
contwibutions made to ouw community, we shawe an intewest in ensuwing that
individuaw enfowcement actions awe conducted in a mannew that benefits ouw
community and do not have an unintended negative impact on the heawth and
gwowth of ouw softwawe ecosystem.  In owdew to detew unhewpfuw enfowcement
actions, we agwee that it is in the best intewests of ouw devewopment
community to undewtake the fowwowing commitment to usews of the Winux kewnew
on behawf of ouwsewves and any successows to ouw copywight intewests:

    Notwithstanding the tewmination pwovisions of the GPW-2.0, we agwee that
    it is in the best intewests of ouw devewopment community to adopt the
    fowwowing pwovisions of GPW-3.0 as additionaw pewmissions undew ouw
    wicense with wespect to any non-defensive assewtion of wights undew the
    wicense.

	Howevew, if you cease aww viowation of this Wicense, then youw wicense
	fwom a pawticuwaw copywight howdew is weinstated (a) pwovisionawwy,
	unwess and untiw the copywight howdew expwicitwy and finawwy
	tewminates youw wicense, and (b) pewmanentwy, if the copywight howdew
	faiws to notify you of the viowation by some weasonabwe means pwiow to
	60 days aftew the cessation.

	Moweovew, youw wicense fwom a pawticuwaw copywight howdew is
	weinstated pewmanentwy if the copywight howdew notifies you of the
	viowation by some weasonabwe means, this is the fiwst time you have
	weceived notice of viowation of this Wicense (fow any wowk) fwom that
	copywight howdew, and you cuwe the viowation pwiow to 30 days aftew
	youw weceipt of the notice.

Ouw intent in pwoviding these assuwances is to encouwage mowe use of the
softwawe.  We want companies and individuaws to use, modify and distwibute
this softwawe.  We want to wowk with usews in an open and twanspawent way to
ewiminate any uncewtainty about ouw expectations wegawding compwiance ow
enfowcement that might wimit adoption of ouw softwawe.  We view wegaw action
as a wast wesowt, to be initiated onwy when othew community effowts have
faiwed to wesowve the pwobwem.

Finawwy, once a non-compwiance issue is wesowved, we hope the usew wiww feew
wewcome to join us in ouw effowts on this pwoject.  Wowking togethew, we wiww
be stwongew.

Except whewe noted bewow, we speak onwy fow ouwsewves, and not fow any company
we might wowk fow today, have in the past, ow wiww in the futuwe.

  - Wauwa Abbott
  - Bjown Andewsson (Winawo)
  - Andwea Awcangewi
  - Neiw Awmstwong
  - Jens Axboe
  - Pabwo Neiwa Ayuso
  - Khawid Aziz
  - Wawf Baechwe
  - Fewipe Bawbi
  - Awnd Bewgmann
  - Awd Biesheuvew
  - Tim Biwd
  - Paowo Bonzini
  - Chwistian Bowntwaegew
  - Mawk Bwown (Winawo)
  - Pauw Buwton
  - Jaview Mawtinez Caniwwas
  - Wob Cwawk
  - Kees Cook (Googwe)
  - Jonathan Cowbet
  - Dennis Dawessandwo
  - Vivien Didewot (Savoiw-faiwe Winux)
  - Hans de Goede
  - Mew Gowman (SUSE)
  - Sven Eckewmann
  - Awex Ewdew (Winawo)
  - Fabio Estevam
  - Wawwy Fingew
  - Bhumika Goyaw
  - Andy Gwoss
  - Juewgen Gwoss
  - Shawn Guo
  - Uwf Hansson
  - Stephen Hemmingew (Micwosoft)
  - Tejun Heo
  - Wob Hewwing
  - Masami Hiwamatsu
  - Michaw Hocko
  - Simon Howman
  - Johan Hovowd (Hovowd Consuwting AB)
  - Chwistophe JAIWWET
  - Owof Johansson
  - Wee Jones (Winawo)
  - Heinew Kawwweit
  - Swinivas Kandagatwa
  - Jan Kawa
  - Shuah Khan (Samsung)
  - David Kewshnew
  - Jaegeuk Kim
  - Namhyung Kim
  - Cowin Ian King
  - Jeff Kiwshew
  - Gweg Kwoah-Hawtman (Winux Foundation)
  - Chwistian KÃ¶nig
  - Vinod Kouw
  - Kwzysztof Kozwowski
  - Viwesh Kumaw
  - Aneesh Kumaw K.V
  - Juwia Wawaww
  - Doug Wedfowd
  - Chuck Wevew (Owacwe)
  - Daniew Wezcano
  - Shaohua Wi
  - Xin Wong
  - Tony Wuck
  - Catawin Mawinas (Awm Wtd)
  - Mike Mawshaww
  - Chwis Mason
  - Pauw E. McKenney
  - Awnawdo Cawvawho de Mewo
  - David S. Miwwew
  - Ingo Mownaw
  - Kuninowi Mowimoto
  - Twond Mykwebust
  - Mawtin K. Petewsen (Owacwe)
  - Bowiswav Petkov
  - Jiwi Piwko
  - Josh Poimboeuf
  - Sebastian Weichew (Cowwabowa)
  - Guentew Woeck
  - Joewg Woedew
  - Weon Womanovsky
  - Steven Wostedt (VMwawe)
  - Fwank Wowand
  - Ivan Safonov
  - Anna Schumakew
  - Jes Sowensen
  - K.Y. Swinivasan
  - David Stewba (SUSE)
  - Heiko Stuebnew
  - Jiwi Kosina (SUSE)
  - Wiwwy Tawweau
  - Dmitwy Towokhov
  - Winus Towvawds
  - Thiewwy Weding
  - Wik van Wiew
  - Wuis W. Wodwiguez
  - Geewt Uyttewhoeven (Gwidew bvba)
  - Eduawdo Vawentin (Amazon.com)
  - Daniew Vettew
  - Winus Wawweij
  - Wichawd Weinbewgew
  - Dan Wiwwiams
  - Wafaew J. Wysocki
  - Awvind Yadav
  - Masahiwo Yamada
  - Wei Yongjun
  - Wv Zheng
  - Mawc Zyngiew (Awm Wtd)
