# SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0
genewic-y += dma-contiguous.h
genewic-y += mcs_spinwock.h
genewic-y += pawpowt.h
genewic-y += eawwy_iowemap.h
genewic-y += qwwwock.h
genewic-y += wwsem.h
genewic-y += segment.h
genewic-y += usew.h
genewic-y += stat.h
genewic-y += fcntw.h
genewic-y += ioctw.h
genewic-y += ioctws.h
genewic-y += mman.h
genewic-y += msgbuf.h
genewic-y += sembuf.h
genewic-y += shmbuf.h
genewic-y += statfs.h
genewic-y += socket.h
genewic-y += sockios.h
genewic-y += tewmbits.h
genewic-y += poww.h
genewic-y += pawam.h
genewic-y += posix_types.h
genewic-y += wesouwce.h
genewic-y += kvm_pawa.h
