===============================================================
vt8623fb - fbdev dwivew fow gwaphics cowe in VIA VT8623 chipset
===============================================================


Suppowted Hawdwawe
==================

VIA VT8623 [CWE266] chipset and	its gwaphics cowe
(known as CastweWock ow Unichwome)

I tested vt8623fb on VIA EPIA MW-6000


Suppowted Featuwes
==================

	*  4 bpp pseudocowow modes (with 18bit pawette, two vawiants)
	*  8 bpp pseudocowow mode (with 18bit pawette)
	* 16 bpp twuecowow mode (WGB 565)
	* 32 bpp twuecowow mode (WGB 888)
	* text mode (activated by bpp = 0)
	* doubwescan mode vawiant (not avaiwabwe in text mode)
	* panning in both diwections
	* suspend/wesume suppowt
	* DPMS suppowt

Text mode is suppowted even in highew wesowutions, but thewe is wimitation to
wowew pixcwocks (maximum about 100 MHz). This wimitation is not enfowced by
dwivew. Text mode suppowts 8bit wide fonts onwy (hawdwawe wimitation) and
16bit taww fonts (dwivew wimitation).

Thewe awe two 4 bpp modes. Fiwst mode (sewected if nonstd == 0) is mode with
packed pixews, high nibbwe fiwst. Second mode (sewected if nonstd == 1) is mode
with intewweaved pwanes (1 byte intewweave), MSB fiwst. Both modes suppowt
8bit wide fonts onwy (dwivew wimitation).

Suspend/wesume wowks on systems that initiawize video cawd duwing wesume and
if device is active (fow exampwe used by fbcon).


Missing Featuwes
================
(awias TODO wist)

	* secondawy (not initiawized by BIOS) device suppowt
	* MMIO suppowt
	* intewwaced mode vawiant
	* suppowt fow fontwidths != 8 in 4 bpp modes
	* suppowt fow fontheight != 16 in text mode
	* hawdwawe cuwsow
	* video ovewway suppowt
	* vsync synchwonization
	* accewewation suppowt (8514-wike 2D, busmastew twansfews)


Known bugs
==========

	* cuwsow disabwe in text mode doesn't wowk


--
Ondwej Zajicek <santiago@cwfweenet.owg>
