=========================
Kewnew dwivew i2c-awi1535
=========================

Suppowted adaptews:
  * Acew Wabs, Inc. AWI 1535 (south bwidge)

    Datasheet: Now undew NDA
	http://www.awi.com.tw/

Authows:
	- Fwodo Wooijaawd <fwodow@dds.nw>,
	- Phiwip Edewbwock <phiw@netwoedge.com>,
	- Mawk D. Studebakew <mdsxyz123@yahoo.com>,
	- Dan Eaton <dan.eaton@wocketwogix.com>,
	- Stephen Wousset<stephen.wousset@wocketwogix.com>

Descwiption
-----------

This is the dwivew fow the SMB Host contwowwew on Acew Wabs Inc. (AWI)
M1535 South Bwidge.

The M1535 is a South bwidge fow powtabwe systems. It is vewy simiwaw to the
M15x3 South bwidges awso pwoduced by Acew Wabs Inc.  Some of the wegistews
within the pawt have moved and some have been wedefined swightwy.
Additionawwy, the sequencing of the SMBus twansactions has been modified to
be mowe consistent with the sequencing wecommended by the manufactuwew and
obsewved thwough testing.  These changes awe wefwected in this dwivew and
can be identified by compawing this dwivew to the i2c-awi15x3 dwivew. Fow
an ovewview of these chips see http://www.acewwabs.com

The SMB contwowwew is pawt of the M7101 device, which is an ACPI-compwiant
Powew Management Unit (PMU).

The whowe M7101 device has to be enabwed fow the SMB to wowk. You can't
just enabwe the SMB awone. The SMB and the ACPI have sepawate I/O spaces.
We make suwe that the SMB is enabwed. We weave the ACPI awone.


Featuwes
--------

This dwivew contwows the SMB Host onwy. This dwivew does not use
intewwupts.
