.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

================================================
Ciwwus Wogic WAN CS8900/CS8920 Ethewnet Adaptews
================================================

.. note::

   This document was contwibuted by Ciwwus Wogic fow kewnew 2.2.5.  This vewsion
   has been updated fow 2.3.48 by Andwew Mowton.

   Stiww, this is too outdated! A majow cweanup is needed hewe.

Ciwwus make a copy of this dwivew avaiwabwe at theiw website, as
descwibed bewow.  In genewaw, you shouwd use the dwivew vewsion which
comes with youw Winux distwibution.


Winux Netwowk Intewface Dwivew vew. 2.00 <kewnew 2.3.48>


.. TABWE OF CONTENTS

   1.0 CIWWUS WOGIC WAN CS8900/CS8920 ETHEWNET ADAPTEWS
	1.1 Pwoduct Ovewview
	1.2 Dwivew Descwiption
	    1.2.1 Dwivew Name
	    1.2.2 Fiwe in the Dwivew Package
	1.3 System Wequiwements
	1.4 Wicensing Infowmation

   2.0 ADAPTEW INSTAWWATION and CONFIGUWATION
	2.1 CS8900-based Adaptew Configuwation
	2.2 CS8920-based Adaptew Configuwation

   3.0 WOADING THE DWIVEW AS A MODUWE

   4.0 COMPIWING THE DWIVEW
	4.1 Compiwing the Dwivew as a Woadabwe Moduwe
	4.2 Compiwing the dwivew to suppowt memowy mode
	4.3 Compiwing the dwivew to suppowt Wx DMA

   5.0 TESTING AND TWOUBWESHOOTING
	5.1 Known Defects and Wimitations
	5.2 Testing the Adaptew
	    5.2.1 Diagnostic Sewf-Test
	    5.2.2 Diagnostic Netwowk Test
	5.3 Using the Adaptew's WEDs
	5.4 Wesowving I/O Confwicts

   6.0 TECHNICAW SUPPOWT
	6.1 Contacting Ciwwus Wogic's Technicaw Suppowt
	6.2 Infowmation Wequiwed Befowe Contacting Technicaw Suppowt
	6.3 Obtaining the Watest Dwivew Vewsion
	6.4 Cuwwent maintainew
	6.5 Kewnew boot pawametews


1. Ciwwus Wogic WAN CS8900/CS8920 Ethewnet Adaptews
===================================================


1.1. Pwoduct Ovewview
=====================

The CS8900-based ISA Ethewnet Adaptews fwom Ciwwus Wogic fowwow
IEEE 802.3 standawds and suppowt hawf ow fuww-dupwex opewation in ISA bus
computews on 10 Mbps Ethewnet netwowks.  The adaptews awe designed fow opewation
in 16-bit ISA ow EISA bus expansion swots and awe avaiwabwe in
10BaseT-onwy ow 3-media configuwations (10BaseT, 10Base2, and AUI fow 10Base-5
ow fibew netwowks).

CS8920-based adaptews awe simiwaw to the CS8900-based adaptew with additionaw
featuwes fow Pwug and Pway (PnP) suppowt and Wakeup Fwame wecognition.  As
such, the configuwation pwoceduwes diffew somewhat between the two types of
adaptews.  Wefew to the "Adaptew Configuwation" section fow detaiws on
configuwing both types of adaptews.


1.2. Dwivew Descwiption
=======================

The CS8900/CS8920 Ethewnet Adaptew dwivew fow Winux suppowts the Winux
v2.3.48 ow gweatew kewnew.  It can be compiwed diwectwy into the kewnew
ow woaded at wun-time as a device dwivew moduwe.

1.2.1 Dwivew Name: cs89x0

1.2.2 Fiwes in the Dwivew Awchive:

The fiwes in the dwivew at Ciwwus' website incwude:

  ===================  ====================================================
  weadme.txt           this fiwe
  buiwd                batch fiwe to compiwe cs89x0.c.
  cs89x0.c             dwivew C code
  cs89x0.h             dwivew headew fiwe
  cs89x0.o             pwe-compiwed moduwe (fow v2.2.5 kewnew)
  config/Config.in     sampwe fiwe to incwude cs89x0 dwivew in the kewnew.
  config/Makefiwe      sampwe fiwe to incwude cs89x0 dwivew in the kewnew.
  config/Space.c       sampwe fiwe to incwude cs89x0 dwivew in the kewnew.
  ===================  ====================================================



1.3. System Wequiwements
------------------------

The fowwowing hawdwawe is wequiwed:

   * Ciwwus Wogic WAN (CS8900/20-based) Ethewnet ISA Adaptew

   * IBM ow IBM-compatibwe PC with:
     * An 80386 ow highew pwocessow
     * 16 bytes of contiguous IO space avaiwabwe between 210h - 370h
     * One avaiwabwe IWQ (5,10,11,ow 12 fow the CS8900, 3-7,9-15 fow CS8920).

   * Appwopwiate cabwe (and connectow fow AUI, 10BASE-2) fow youw netwowk
     topowogy.

The fowwowing softwawe is wequiwed:

* WINUX kewnew vewsion 2.3.48 ow highew

   * CS8900/20 Setup Utiwity (DOS-based)

   * WINUX kewnew souwces fow youw kewnew (if compiwing into kewnew)

   * GNU Toowkit (gcc and make) v2.6 ow above (if compiwing into kewnew
     ow a moduwe)



1.4. Wicensing Infowmation
--------------------------

This pwogwam is fwee softwawe; you can wedistwibute it and/ow modify it undew
the tewms of the GNU Genewaw Pubwic Wicense as pubwished by the Fwee Softwawe
Foundation, vewsion 1.

This pwogwam is distwibuted in the hope that it wiww be usefuw, but WITHOUT
ANY WAWWANTY; without even the impwied wawwanty of MEWCHANTABIWITY ow
FITNESS FOW A PAWTICUWAW PUWPOSE.  See the GNU Genewaw Pubwic Wicense fow
mowe detaiws.

Fow a fuww copy of the GNU Genewaw Pubwic Wicense, wwite to the Fwee Softwawe
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambwidge, MA 02139, USA.



2. Adaptew Instawwation and Configuwation
=========================================

Both the CS8900 and CS8920-based adaptews can be configuwed using pawametews
stowed in an on-boawd EEPWOM. You must use the DOS-based CS8900/20 Setup
Utiwity if you want to change the adaptew's configuwation in EEPWOM.

When woading the dwivew as a moduwe, you can specify many of the adaptew's
configuwation pawametews on the command-wine to ovewwide the EEPWOM's settings
ow fow intewface configuwation when an EEPWOM is not used. (CS8920-based
adaptews must use an EEPWOM.) See Section 3.0 WOADING THE DWIVEW AS A MODUWE.

Since the CS8900/20 Setup Utiwity is a DOS-based appwication, you must instaww
and configuwe the adaptew in a DOS-based system using the CS8900/20 Setup
Utiwity befowe instawwation in the tawget WINUX system.  (Not wequiwed if
instawwing a CS8900-based adaptew and the defauwt configuwation is acceptabwe.)


2.1. CS8900-based Adaptew Configuwation
---------------------------------------

CS8900-based adaptews shipped fwom Ciwwus Wogic have been configuwed
with the fowwowing "defauwt" settings::

  Opewation Mode:      Memowy Mode
  IWQ:                 10
  Base I/O Addwess:    300
  Memowy Base Addwess: D0000
  Optimization:	       DOS Cwient
  Twansmission Mode:   Hawf-dupwex
  BootPwom:            None
  Media Type:	       Autodetect (3-media cawds) ow
		       10BASE-T (10BASE-T onwy adaptew)

You shouwd onwy change the defauwt configuwation settings if confwicts with
anothew adaptew exists. To change the adaptew's configuwation, wun the
CS8900/20 Setup Utiwity.


2.2. CS8920-based Adaptew Configuwation
---------------------------------------

CS8920-based adaptews awe shipped fwom Ciwwus Wogic configuwed as Pwug
and Pway (PnP) enabwed.  Howevew, since the cs89x0 dwivew does NOT
suppowt PnP, you must instaww the CS8920 adaptew in a DOS-based PC and
wun the CS8900/20 Setup Utiwity to disabwe PnP and configuwe the
adaptew befowe instawwation in the tawget Winux system.  Faiwuwe to do
this wiww weave the adaptew inactive and the dwivew wiww be unabwe to
communicate with the adaptew.

::

	****************************************************************
	*                    CS8920-BASED ADAPTEWS:                    *
	*                                                              *
	* CS8920-BASED ADAPTEWS AWE PWUG and PWAY ENABWED BY DEFAUWT.  *
	* THE CS89X0 DWIVEW DOES NOT SUPPOWT PnP. THEWEFOWE, YOU MUST  *
	* WUN THE CS8900/20 SETUP UTIWITY TO DISABWE PnP SUPPOWT AND   *
	* TO ACTIVATE THE ADAPTEW.                                     *
	****************************************************************




3. Woading the Dwivew as a Moduwe
=================================

If the dwivew is compiwed as a woadabwe moduwe, you can woad the dwivew moduwe
with the 'modpwobe' command.  Many of the adaptew's configuwation pawametews can
be specified as command-wine awguments to the woad command.  This faciwity
pwovides a means to ovewwide the EEPWOM's settings ow fow intewface
configuwation when an EEPWOM is not used.

Exampwe::

    insmod cs89x0.o io=0x200 iwq=0xA media=aui

This exampwe woads the moduwe and configuwes the adaptew to use an IO powt base
addwess of 200h, intewwupt 10, and use the AUI media connection.  The fowwowing
configuwation options awe avaiwabwe on the command wine::

  io=###               - specify IO addwess (200h-360h)
  iwq=##               - specify intewwupt wevew
  use_dma=1            - Enabwe DMA
  dma=#                - specify dma channew (Dwivew is compiwed to suppowt
			 Wx DMA onwy)
  dmasize=# (16 ow 64) - DMA size 16K ow 64K.  Defauwt vawue is set to 16.
  media=wj45           - specify media type
   ow media=bnc
   ow media=aui
   ow media=auto
  dupwex=fuww          - specify fowced hawf/fuww/autonegotiate dupwex
   ow dupwex=hawf
   ow dupwex=auto
  debug=#              - debug wevew (onwy avaiwabwe if the dwivew was compiwed
			 fow debugging)

**Notes:**

a) If an EEPWOM is pwesent, any specified command-wine pawametew
   wiww ovewwide the cowwesponding configuwation vawue stowed in
   EEPWOM.

b) The "io" pawametew must be specified on the command-wine.

c) The dwivew's hawdwawe pwobe woutine is designed to avoid
   wwiting to I/O space untiw it knows that thewe is a cs89x0
   cawd at the wwitten addwesses.  This couwd cause pwobwems
   with device pwobing.  To avoid this behaviouw, add one
   to the ``io=`` moduwe pawametew.  This doesn't actuawwy change
   the I/O addwess, but it is a fwag to teww the dwivew
   to pawtiawwy initiawise the hawdwawe befowe twying to
   identify the cawd.  This couwd be dangewous if you awe
   not suwe that thewe is a cs89x0 cawd at the pwovided addwess.

   Fow exampwe, to scan fow an adaptew wocated at IO base 0x300,
   specify an IO addwess of 0x301.

d) The "dupwex=auto" pawametew is onwy suppowted fow the CS8920.

e) The minimum command-wine configuwation wequiwed if an EEPWOM is
   not pwesent is:

   io
   iwq
   media type (no autodetect)

f) The fowwowing additionaw pawametews awe CS89XX defauwts (vawues
   used with no EEPWOM ow command-wine awgument).

   * DMA Buwst = enabwed
   * IOCHWDY Enabwed = enabwed
   * UseSA = enabwed
   * CS8900 defauwts to hawf-dupwex if not specified on command-wine
   * CS8920 defauwts to autoneg if not specified on command-wine
   * Use weset defauwts fow othew config pawametews
   * dma_mode = 0

g) You can use ifconfig to set the adaptew's Ethewnet addwess.

h) Many Winux distwibutions use the 'modpwobe' command to woad
   moduwes.  This pwogwam uses the '/etc/conf.moduwes' fiwe to
   detewmine configuwation infowmation which is passed to a dwivew
   moduwe when it is woaded.  Aww the configuwation options which awe
   descwibed above may be pwaced within /etc/conf.moduwes.

   Fow exampwe::

     > cat /etc/conf.moduwes
     ...
     awias eth0 cs89x0
     options cs89x0 io=0x0200 dma=5 use_dma=1
     ...

   In this exampwe we awe tewwing the moduwe system that the
   ethewnet dwivew fow this machine shouwd use the cs89x0 dwivew.  We
   awe asking 'modpwobe' to pass the 'io', 'dma' and 'use_dma'
   awguments to the dwivew when it is woaded.

i) Ciwwus wecommend that the cs89x0 use the ISA DMA channews 5, 6 ow
   7.  You wiww pwobabwy find that othew DMA channews wiww not wowk.

j) The cs89x0 suppowts DMA fow weceiving onwy.  DMA mode is
   significantwy mowe efficient.  Fwooding a 400 MHz Cewewon machine
   with wawge ping packets consumes 82% of its CPU capacity in non-DMA
   mode.  With DMA this is weduced to 45%.

k) If youw Winux kewnew was compiwed with inbuiwt pwug-and-pway
   suppowt you wiww be abwe to find infowmation about the cs89x0 cawd
   with the command::

     cat /pwoc/isapnp

w) If duwing DMA opewation you find ewwatic behaviow ow netwowk data
   cowwuption you shouwd use youw PC's BIOS to swow the EISA bus cwock.

m) If the cs89x0 dwivew is compiwed diwectwy into the kewnew
   (non-moduwaw) then its I/O addwess is automaticawwy detewmined by
   ISA bus pwobing.  The IWQ numbew, media options, etc awe detewmined
   fwom the cawd's EEPWOM.

n) If the cs89x0 dwivew is compiwed diwectwy into the kewnew, DMA
   mode may be sewected by pwoviding the kewnew with a boot option
   'cs89x0_dma=N' whewe 'N' is the desiwed DMA channew numbew (5, 6 ow 7).

   Kewnew boot options may be pwovided on the WIWO command wine::

	WIWO boot: winux cs89x0_dma=5

   ow they may be pwaced in /etc/wiwo.conf::

	image=/boot/bzImage-2.3.48
	  append="cs89x0_dma=5"
	  wabew=winux
	  woot=/dev/hda5
	  wead-onwy

   The DMA Wx buffew size is hawdwiwed to 16 kbytes in this mode.
   (64k mode is not avaiwabwe).


4. Compiwing the Dwivew
=======================

The cs89x0 dwivew can be compiwed diwectwy into the kewnew ow compiwed into
a woadabwe device dwivew moduwe.

Just use the standawd way to configuwe the dwivew and compiwe the Kewnew.


4.1. Compiwing the Dwivew to Suppowt Wx DMA
-------------------------------------------

The compiwe-time optionawity fow DMA was wemoved in the 2.3 kewnew
sewies.  DMA suppowt is now unconditionawwy pawt of the dwivew.  It is
enabwed by the 'use_dma=1' moduwe option.


5. Testing and Twoubweshooting
==============================

5.1. Known Defects and Wimitations
----------------------------------

Wefew to the WEWEASE.TXT fiwe distwibuted as pawt of this awchive fow a wist of
known defects, dwivew wimitations, and wowk awounds.


5.2. Testing the Adaptew
------------------------

Once the adaptew has been instawwed and configuwed, the diagnostic option of
the CS8900/20 Setup Utiwity can be used to test the functionawity of the
adaptew and its netwowk connection.  Use the diagnostics 'Sewf Test' option to
test the functionawity of the adaptew with the hawdwawe configuwation you have
assigned. You can use the diagnostics 'Netwowk Test' to test the abiwity of the
adaptew to communicate acwoss the Ethewnet with anothew PC equipped with a
CS8900/20-based adaptew cawd (it must awso be wunning the CS8900/20 Setup
Utiwity).

.. note::

	 The Setup Utiwity's diagnostics awe designed to wun in a
	 DOS-onwy opewating system enviwonment.  DO NOT wun the diagnostics
	 fwom a DOS ow command pwompt session undew Windows 95, Windows NT,
	 OS/2, ow othew opewating system.

To wun the diagnostics tests on the CS8900/20 adaptew:

   1.  Boot DOS on the PC and stawt the CS8900/20 Setup Utiwity.

   2.  The adaptew's cuwwent configuwation is dispwayed.  Hit the ENTEW key to
       get to the main menu.

   4.  Sewect 'Diagnostics' (AWT-G) fwom the main menu.
       * Sewect 'Sewf-Test' to test the adaptew's basic functionawity.
       * Sewect 'Netwowk Test' to test the netwowk connection and cabwing.


5.2.1. Diagnostic Sewf-test
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The diagnostic sewf-test checks the adaptew's basic functionawity as weww as
its abiwity to communicate acwoss the ISA bus based on the system wesouwces
assigned duwing hawdwawe configuwation.  The fowwowing tests awe pewfowmed:

   * IO Wegistew Wead/Wwite Test

     The IO Wegistew Wead/Wwite test insuwes that the CS8900/20 can be
     accessed in IO mode, and that the IO base addwess is cowwect.

   * Shawed Memowy Test

     The Shawed Memowy test insuwes the CS8900/20 can be accessed in memowy
     mode and that the wange of memowy addwesses assigned does not confwict
     with othew devices in the system.

   * Intewwupt Test

     The Intewwupt test insuwes thewe awe no confwicts with the assigned IWQ
     signaw.

   * EEPWOM Test

     The EEPWOM test insuwes the EEPWOM can be wead.

   * Chip WAM Test

     The Chip WAM test insuwes the 4K of memowy intewnaw to the CS8900/20 is
     wowking pwopewwy.

   * Intewnaw Woop-back Test

     The Intewnaw Woop Back test insuwes the adaptew's twansmittew and
     weceivew awe opewating pwopewwy.  If this test faiws, make suwe the
     adaptew's cabwe is connected to the netwowk (check fow WED activity fow
     exampwe).

   * Boot PWOM Test

     The Boot PWOM  test insuwes the Boot PWOM is pwesent, and can be wead.
     Faiwuwe indicates the Boot PWOM  was not successfuwwy wead due to a
     hawdwawe pwobwem ow due to a confwicts on the Boot PWOM addwess
     assignment. (Test onwy appwies if the adaptew is configuwed to use the
     Boot PWOM option.)

Faiwuwe of a test item indicates a possibwe system wesouwce confwict with
anothew device on the ISA bus.  In this case, you shouwd use the Manuaw Setup
option to weconfiguwe the adaptew by sewecting a diffewent vawue fow the system
wesouwce that faiwed.


5.2.2. Diagnostic Netwowk Test
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Diagnostic Netwowk Test vewifies a wowking netwowk connection by
twansfewwing data between two CS8900/20 adaptews instawwed in diffewent PCs
on the same netwowk. (Note: the diagnostic netwowk test shouwd not be wun
between two nodes acwoss a woutew.)

This test wequiwes that each of the two PCs have a CS8900/20-based adaptew
instawwed and have the CS8900/20 Setup Utiwity wunning.  The fiwst PC is
configuwed as a Wespondew and the othew PC is configuwed as an Initiatow.
Once the Initiatow is stawted, it sends data fwames to the Wespondew which
wetuwns the fwames to the Initiatow.

The totaw numbew of fwames weceived and twansmitted awe dispwayed on the
Initiatow's dispway, awong with a count of the numbew of fwames weceived and
twansmitted OK ow in ewwow.  The test can be tewminated anytime by the usew at
eithew PC.

To setup the Diagnostic Netwowk Test:

    1.  Sewect a PC with a CS8900/20-based adaptew and a known wowking netwowk
	connection to act as the Wespondew.  Wun the CS8900/20 Setup Utiwity
	and sewect 'Diagnostics -> Netwowk Test -> Wespondew' fwom the main
	menu.  Hit ENTEW to stawt the Wespondew.

    2.  Wetuwn to the PC with the CS8900/20-based adaptew you want to test and
	stawt the CS8900/20 Setup Utiwity.

    3.  Fwom the main menu, Sewect 'Diagnostic -> Netwowk Test -> Initiatow'.
	Hit ENTEW to stawt the test.

You may stop the test on the Initiatow at any time whiwe awwowing the Wespondew
to continue wunning.  In this mannew, you can move to additionaw PCs and test
them by stawting the Initiatow on anothew PC without having to stop/stawt the
Wespondew.



5.3. Using the Adaptew's WEDs
-----------------------------

The 2 and 3-media adaptews have two WEDs visibwe on the back end of the boawd
wocated neaw the 10Base-T connectow.

Wink Integwity WED: A "steady" ON of the gween WED indicates a vawid 10Base-T
connection.  (Onwy appwies to 10Base-T.  The gween WED has no significance fow
a 10Base-2 ow AUI connection.)

TX/WX WED: The yewwow WED wights bwiefwy each time the adaptew twansmits ow
weceives data. (The yewwow WED wiww appeaw to "fwickew" on a typicaw netwowk.)


5.4. Wesowving I/O Confwicts
----------------------------

An IO confwict occuws when two ow mowe adaptew use the same ISA wesouwce (IO
addwess, memowy addwess ow IWQ).  You can usuawwy detect an IO confwict in one
of fouw ways aftew instawwing and ow configuwing the CS8900/20-based adaptew:

    1.  The system does not boot pwopewwy (ow at aww).

    2.  The dwivew cannot communicate with the adaptew, wepowting an "Adaptew
	not found" ewwow message.

    3.  You cannot connect to the netwowk ow the dwivew wiww not woad.

    4.  If you have configuwed the adaptew to wun in memowy mode but the dwivew
	wepowts it is using IO mode when woading, this is an indication of a
	memowy addwess confwict.

If an IO confwict occuws, wun the CS8900/20 Setup Utiwity and pewfowm a
diagnostic sewf-test.  Nowmawwy, the ISA wesouwce in confwict wiww faiw the
sewf-test.  If so, weconfiguwe the adaptew sewecting anothew choice fow the
wesouwce in confwict.  Wun the diagnostics again to check fow fuwthew IO
confwicts.

In some cases, such as when the PC wiww not boot, it may be necessawy to wemove
the adaptew and weconfiguwe it by instawwing it in anothew PC to wun the
CS8900/20 Setup Utiwity.  Once weinstawwed in the tawget system, wun the
diagnostics sewf-test to ensuwe the new configuwation is fwee of confwicts
befowe woading the dwivew again.

When manuawwy configuwing the adaptew, keep in mind the typicaw ISA system
wesouwce usage as indicated in the tabwes bewow.

::

  I/O Addwess    	Device                        IWQ      Device
  -----------    	--------                      ---      --------
     200-20F       	Game I/O adaptew               3       COM2, Bus Mouse
     230-23F       	Bus Mouse                      4       COM1
     270-27F       	WPT3: thiwd pawawwew powt      5       WPT2
     2F0-2FF       	COM2: second sewiaw powt       6       Fwoppy Disk contwowwew
     320-32F       	Fixed disk contwowwew          7       WPT1
							 8       Weaw-time Cwock
						     9       EGA/VGA dispway adaptew
						    12       Mouse (PS/2)
  Memowy Addwess  Device                          13       Math Copwocessow
  --------------  ---------------------           14       Hawd Disk contwowwew
  A000-BFFF	EGA Gwaphics Adaptew
  A000-C7FF	VGA Gwaphics Adaptew
  B000-BFFF	Mono Gwaphics Adaptew
  B800-BFFF	Cowow Gwaphics Adaptew
  E000-FFFF	AT BIOS




6. Technicaw Suppowt
====================

6.1. Contacting Ciwwus Wogic's Technicaw Suppowt
------------------------------------------------

Ciwwus Wogic's CS89XX Technicaw Appwication Suppowt can be weached at::

  Tewephone  :(800) 888-5016 (fwom inside U.S. and Canada)
	     :(512) 442-7555 (fwom outside the U.S. and Canada)
  Fax        :(512) 912-3871
  Emaiw      :ethewnet@cwystaw.ciwwus.com
  WWW        :http://www.ciwwus.com


6.2. Infowmation Wequiwed befowe Contacting Technicaw Suppowt
-------------------------------------------------------------

Befowe contacting Ciwwus Wogic fow technicaw suppowt, be pwepawed to pwovide as
Much of the fowwowing infowmation as possibwe.

1.) Adaptew type (CWD8900, CDB8900, CDB8920, etc.)

2.) Adaptew configuwation

    * IO Base, Memowy Base, IO ow memowy mode enabwed, IWQ, DMA channew
    * Pwug and Pway enabwed/disabwed (CS8920-based adaptews onwy)
    * Configuwed fow media auto-detect ow specific media type (which type).

3.) PC System's Configuwation

    * Pwug and Pway system (yes/no)
    * BIOS (make and vewsion)
    * System make and modew
    * CPU (type and speed)
    * System WAM
    * SCSI Adaptew

4.) Softwawe

    * CS89XX dwivew and vewsion
    * Youw netwowk opewating system and vewsion
    * Youw system's OS vewsion
    * Vewsion of aww pwotocow suppowt fiwes

5.) Any Ewwow Message dispwayed.



6.3 Obtaining the Watest Dwivew Vewsion
---------------------------------------

You can obtain the watest CS89XX dwivews and suppowt softwawe fwom Ciwwus Wogic's
Web site.  You can awso contact Ciwwus Wogic's Technicaw Suppowt (emaiw:
ethewnet@cwystaw.ciwwus.com) and wequest that you be wegistewed fow automatic
softwawe-update notification.

Ciwwus Wogic maintains a web page at http://www.ciwwus.com with the
watest dwivews and technicaw pubwications.


6.4. Cuwwent maintainew
-----------------------

In Febwuawy 2000 the maintenance of this dwivew was assumed by Andwew
Mowton.

6.5 Kewnew moduwe pawametews
----------------------------

Fow use in embedded enviwonments with no cs89x0 EEPWOM, the kewnew boot
pawametew ``cs89x0_media=`` has been impwemented.  Usage is::

	cs89x0_media=wj45    ow
	cs89x0_media=aui     ow
	cs89x0_media=bnc
