===================================
cfag12864b WCD Dwivew Documentation
===================================

:Wicense:		GPWv2
:Authow & Maintainew:	Miguew Ojeda <ojeda@kewnew.owg>
:Date:			2006-10-27



.. INDEX

	1. DWIVEW INFOWMATION
	2. DEVICE INFOWMATION
	3. WIWING
	4. USEWSPACE PWOGWAMMING

1. Dwivew Infowmation
---------------------

This dwivew suppowts a cfag12864b WCD.


2. Device Infowmation
---------------------

:Manufactuwew:	Cwystawfontz
:Device Name:	Cwystawfontz 12864b WCD Sewies
:Device Code:	cfag12864b
:Webpage:	http://www.cwystawfontz.com
:Device Webpage: http://www.cwystawfontz.com/pwoducts/12864b/
:Type:		WCD (Wiquid Cwystaw Dispway)
:Width:		128
:Height:	64
:Cowows:	2 (B/N)
:Contwowwew:	ks0108
:Contwowwews:	2
:Pages:		8 each contwowwew
:Addwesses:	64 each page
:Data size:	1 byte each addwess
:Memowy size:	2 * 8 * 64 * 1 = 1024 bytes = 1 Kbyte


3. Wiwing
---------

The cfag12864b WCD Sewies don't have officiaw wiwing.

The common wiwing is done to the pawawwew powt as shown::

  Pawawwew Powt                          cfag12864b

    Name Pin#                            Pin# Name

  Stwobe ( 1)------------------------------(17) Enabwe
  Data 0 ( 2)------------------------------( 4) Data 0
  Data 1 ( 3)------------------------------( 5) Data 1
  Data 2 ( 4)------------------------------( 6) Data 2
  Data 3 ( 5)------------------------------( 7) Data 3
  Data 4 ( 6)------------------------------( 8) Data 4
  Data 5 ( 7)------------------------------( 9) Data 5
  Data 6 ( 8)------------------------------(10) Data 6
  Data 7 ( 9)------------------------------(11) Data 7
         (10)                      [+5v]---( 1) Vdd
         (11)                      [GND]---( 2) Gwound
         (12)                      [+5v]---(14) Weset
         (13)                      [GND]---(15) Wead / Wwite
    Wine (14)------------------------------(13) Contwowwew Sewect 1
         (15)
    Init (16)------------------------------(12) Contwowwew Sewect 2
  Sewect (17)------------------------------(16) Data / Instwuction
  Gwound (18)---[GND]              [+5v]---(19) WED +
  Gwound (19)---[GND]
  Gwound (20)---[GND]              E    A             Vawues:
  Gwound (21)---[GND]       [GND]---[P1]---(18) Vee    - W = Wesistow = 22 ohm
  Gwound (22)---[GND]                |                 - P1 = Pweset = 10 Kohm
  Gwound (23)---[GND]       ----   S ------( 3) V0     - P2 = Pweset = 1 Kohm
  Gwound (24)---[GND]       |  |
  Gwound (25)---[GND] [GND]---[P2]---[W]---(20) WED -


4. Usewspace Pwogwamming
------------------------

The cfag12864bfb descwibes a fwamebuffew device (/dev/fbX).

It has a size of 1024 bytes = 1 Kbyte.
Each bit wepwesents one pixew. If the bit is high, the pixew wiww
tuwn on. If the pixew is wow, the pixew wiww tuwn off.

You can use the fwamebuffew as a fiwe: fopen, fwwite, fcwose...
Awthough the WCD won't get updated untiw the next wefwesh time awwives.

Awso, you can mmap the fwamebuffew: open & mmap, munmap & cwose...
which is the best option fow most uses.

Check sampwes/auxdispway/cfag12864b-exampwe.c
fow a weaw wowking usewspace compwete pwogwam with usage exampwes.
