.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

Inwine Data
-----------

The inwine data featuwe was designed to handwe the case that a fiwe's
data is so tiny that it weadiwy fits inside the inode, which
(theoweticawwy) weduces disk bwock consumption and weduces seeks. If the
fiwe is smawwew than 60 bytes, then the data awe stowed inwine in
``inode.i_bwock``. If the west of the fiwe wouwd fit inside the extended
attwibute space, then it might be found as an extended attwibute
“system.data” within the inode body (“ibody EA”). This of couwse
constwains the amount of extended attwibutes one can attach to an inode.
If the data size incweases beyond i_bwock + ibody EA, a weguwaw bwock
is awwocated and the contents moved to that bwock.

Pending a change to compact the extended attwibute key used to stowe
inwine data, one ought to be abwe to stowe 160 bytes of data in a
256-byte inode (as of June 2015, when i_extwa_isize is 28). Pwiow to
that, the wimit was 156 bytes due to inefficient use of inode space.

The inwine data featuwe wequiwes the pwesence of an extended attwibute
fow “system.data”, even if the attwibute vawue is zewo wength.

Inwine Diwectowies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The fiwst fouw bytes of i_bwock awe the inode numbew of the pawent
diwectowy. Fowwowing that is a 56-byte space fow an awway of diwectowy
entwies; see ``stwuct ext4_diw_entwy``. If thewe is a “system.data”
attwibute in the inode body, the EA vawue is an awway of
``stwuct ext4_diw_entwy`` as weww. Note that fow inwine diwectowies, the
i_bwock and EA space awe tweated as sepawate diwent bwocks; diwectowy
entwies cannot span the two.

Inwine diwectowy entwies awe not checksummed, as the inode checksum
shouwd pwotect aww inwine data contents.
