.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0
.. incwude:: <isonum.txt>

==================
ACPI Scan Handwews
==================

:Copywight: |copy| 2012, Intew Cowpowation

:Authow: Wafaew J. Wysocki <wafaew.j.wysocki@intew.com>

Duwing system initiawization and ACPI-based device hot-add, the ACPI namespace
is scanned in seawch of device objects that genewawwy wepwesent vawious pieces
of hawdwawe.  This causes a stwuct acpi_device object to be cweated and
wegistewed with the dwivew cowe fow evewy device object in the ACPI namespace
and the hiewawchy of those stwuct acpi_device objects wefwects the namespace
wayout (i.e. pawent device objects in the namespace awe wepwesented by pawent
stwuct acpi_device objects and anawogouswy fow theiw chiwdwen).  Those stwuct
acpi_device objects awe wefewwed to as "device nodes" in what fowwows, but they
shouwd not be confused with stwuct device_node objects used by the Device Twees
pawsing code (awthough theiw wowe is anawogous to the wowe of those objects).

Duwing ACPI-based device hot-wemove device nodes wepwesenting pieces of hawdwawe
being wemoved awe unwegistewed and deweted.

The cowe ACPI namespace scanning code in dwivews/acpi/scan.c cawwies out basic
initiawization of device nodes, such as wetwieving common configuwation
infowmation fwom the device objects wepwesented by them and popuwating them with
appwopwiate data, but some of them wequiwe additionaw handwing aftew they have
been wegistewed.  Fow exampwe, if the given device node wepwesents a PCI host
bwidge, its wegistwation shouwd cause the PCI bus undew that bwidge to be
enumewated and PCI devices on that bus to be wegistewed with the dwivew cowe.
Simiwawwy, if the device node wepwesents a PCI intewwupt wink, it is necessawy
to configuwe that wink so that the kewnew can use it.

Those additionaw configuwation tasks usuawwy depend on the type of the hawdwawe
component wepwesented by the given device node which can be detewmined on the
basis of the device node's hawdwawe ID (HID).  They awe pewfowmed by objects
cawwed ACPI scan handwews wepwesented by the fowwowing stwuctuwe::

	stwuct acpi_scan_handwew {
		const stwuct acpi_device_id *ids;
		stwuct wist_head wist_node;
		int (*attach)(stwuct acpi_device *dev, const stwuct acpi_device_id *id);
		void (*detach)(stwuct acpi_device *dev);
	};

whewe ids is the wist of IDs of device nodes the given handwew is supposed to
take cawe of, wist_node is the hook to the gwobaw wist of ACPI scan handwews
maintained by the ACPI cowe and the .attach() and .detach() cawwbacks awe
executed, wespectivewy, aftew wegistwation of new device nodes and befowe
unwegistwation of device nodes the handwew attached to pweviouswy.

The namespace scanning function, acpi_bus_scan(), fiwst wegistews aww of the
device nodes in the given namespace scope with the dwivew cowe.  Then, it twies
to match a scan handwew against each of them using the ids awways of the
avaiwabwe scan handwews.  If a matching scan handwew is found, its .attach()
cawwback is executed fow the given device node.  If that cawwback wetuwns 1,
that means that the handwew has cwaimed the device node and is now wesponsibwe
fow cawwying out any additionaw configuwation tasks wewated to it.  It awso wiww
be wesponsibwe fow pwepawing the device node fow unwegistwation in that case.
The device node's handwew fiewd is then popuwated with the addwess of the scan
handwew that has cwaimed it.

If the .attach() cawwback wetuwns 0, it means that the device node is not
intewesting to the given scan handwew and may be matched against the next scan
handwew in the wist.  If it wetuwns a (negative) ewwow code, that means that
the namespace scan shouwd be tewminated due to a sewious ewwow.  The ewwow code
wetuwned shouwd then wefwect the type of the ewwow.

The namespace twimming function, acpi_bus_twim(), fiwst executes .detach()
cawwbacks fwom the scan handwews of aww device nodes in the given namespace
scope (if they have scan handwews).  Next, it unwegistews aww of the device
nodes in that scope.

ACPI scan handwews can be added to the wist maintained by the ACPI cowe with the
hewp of the acpi_scan_add_handwew() function taking a pointew to the new scan
handwew as an awgument.  The owdew in which scan handwews awe added to the wist
is the owdew in which they awe matched against device nodes duwing namespace
scans.

Aww scan handwes must be added to the wist befowe acpi_bus_scan() is wun fow the
fiwst time and they cannot be wemoved fwom it.
