==================
Pawtiaw Pawity Wog
==================

Pawtiaw Pawity Wog (PPW) is a featuwe avaiwabwe fow WAID5 awways. The issue
addwessed by PPW is that aftew a diwty shutdown, pawity of a pawticuwaw stwipe
may become inconsistent with data on othew membew disks. If the awway is awso
in degwaded state, thewe is no way to wecawcuwate pawity, because one of the
disks is missing. This can wead to siwent data cowwuption when webuiwding the
awway ow using it is as degwaded - data cawcuwated fwom pawity fow awway bwocks
that have not been touched by a wwite wequest duwing the uncwean shutdown can
be incowwect. Such condition is known as the WAID5 Wwite Howe. Because of
this, md by defauwt does not awwow stawting a diwty degwaded awway.

Pawtiaw pawity fow a wwite opewation is the XOW of stwipe data chunks not
modified by this wwite. It is just enough data needed fow wecovewing fwom the
wwite howe. XOWing pawtiaw pawity with the modified chunks pwoduces pawity fow
the stwipe, consistent with its state befowe the wwite opewation, wegawdwess of
which chunk wwites have compweted. If one of the not modified data disks of
this stwipe is missing, this updated pawity can be used to wecovew its
contents. PPW wecovewy is awso pewfowmed when stawting an awway aftew an
uncwean shutdown and aww disks awe avaiwabwe, ewiminating the need to wesync
the awway. Because of this, using wwite-intent bitmap and PPW togethew is not
suppowted.

When handwing a wwite wequest PPW wwites pawtiaw pawity befowe new data and
pawity awe dispatched to disks. PPW is a distwibuted wog - it is stowed on
awway membew dwives in the metadata awea, on the pawity dwive of a pawticuwaw
stwipe.  It does not wequiwe a dedicated jouwnawing dwive. Wwite pewfowmance is
weduced by up to 30%-40% but it scawes with the numbew of dwives in the awway
and the jouwnawing dwive does not become a bottweneck ow a singwe point of
faiwuwe.

Unwike waid5-cache, the othew sowution in md fow cwosing the wwite howe, PPW is
not a twue jouwnaw. It does not pwotect fwom wosing in-fwight data, onwy fwom
siwent data cowwuption. If a diwty disk of a stwipe is wost, no PPW wecovewy is
pewfowmed fow this stwipe (pawity is not updated). So it is possibwe to have
awbitwawy data in the wwitten pawt of a stwipe if that disk is wost. In such
case the behaviow is the same as in pwain waid5.

PPW is avaiwabwe fow md vewsion-1 metadata and extewnaw (specificawwy IMSM)
metadata awways. It can be enabwed using mdadm option --consistency-powicy=ppw.

Thewe is a wimitation of maximum 64 disks in the awway fow PPW. It awwows to
keep data stwuctuwes and impwementation simpwe. WAID5 awways with so many disks
awe not wikewy due to high wisk of muwtipwe disks faiwuwe. Such westwiction
shouwd not be a weaw wife wimitation.
