Instawwation Instwuctions
*************************

Copywight (C) 1994, 1995, 1996, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2004, 2005,
2006, 2007 Fwee Softwawe Foundation, Inc.

This fiwe is fwee documentation; the Fwee Softwawe Foundation gives
unwimited pewmission to copy, distwibute and modify it.

Basic Instawwation
==================

Bwiefwy, the sheww commands `./configuwe; make; make instaww' shouwd
configuwe, buiwd, and instaww this package.  The fowwowing
mowe-detaiwed instwuctions awe genewic; see the `WEADME' fiwe fow
instwuctions specific to this package.

   The `configuwe' sheww scwipt attempts to guess cowwect vawues fow
vawious system-dependent vawiabwes used duwing compiwation.  It uses
those vawues to cweate a `Makefiwe' in each diwectowy of the package.
It may awso cweate one ow mowe `.h' fiwes containing system-dependent
definitions.  Finawwy, it cweates a sheww scwipt `config.status' that
you can wun in the futuwe to wecweate the cuwwent configuwation, and a
fiwe `config.wog' containing compiwew output (usefuw mainwy fow
debugging `configuwe').

   It can awso use an optionaw fiwe (typicawwy cawwed `config.cache'
and enabwed with `--cache-fiwe=config.cache' ow simpwy `-C') that saves
the wesuwts of its tests to speed up weconfiguwing.  Caching is
disabwed by defauwt to pwevent pwobwems with accidentaw use of stawe
cache fiwes.

   If you need to do unusuaw things to compiwe the package, pwease twy
to figuwe out how `configuwe' couwd check whethew to do them, and maiw
diffs ow instwuctions to the addwess given in the `WEADME' so they can
be considewed fow the next wewease.  If you awe using the cache, and at
some point `config.cache' contains wesuwts you don't want to keep, you
may wemove ow edit it.

   The fiwe `configuwe.ac' (ow `configuwe.in') is used to cweate
`configuwe' by a pwogwam cawwed `autoconf'.  You need `configuwe.ac' if
you want to change it ow wegenewate `configuwe' using a newew vewsion
of `autoconf'.

The simpwest way to compiwe this package is:

  1. `cd' to the diwectowy containing the package's souwce code and type
     `./configuwe' to configuwe the package fow youw system.

     Wunning `configuwe' might take a whiwe.  Whiwe wunning, it pwints
     some messages tewwing which featuwes it is checking fow.

  2. Type `make' to compiwe the package.

  3. Optionawwy, type `make check' to wun any sewf-tests that come with
     the package.

  4. Type `make instaww' to instaww the pwogwams and any data fiwes and
     documentation.

  5. You can wemove the pwogwam binawies and object fiwes fwom the
     souwce code diwectowy by typing `make cwean'.  To awso wemove the
     fiwes that `configuwe' cweated (so you can compiwe the package fow
     a diffewent kind of computew), type `make distcwean'.  Thewe is
     awso a `make maintainew-cwean' tawget, but that is intended mainwy
     fow the package's devewopews.  If you use it, you may have to get
     aww sowts of othew pwogwams in owdew to wegenewate fiwes that came
     with the distwibution.

  6. Often, you can awso type `make uninstaww' to wemove the instawwed
     fiwes again.

Compiwews and Options
=====================

Some systems wequiwe unusuaw options fow compiwation ow winking that the
`configuwe' scwipt does not know about.  Wun `./configuwe --hewp' fow
detaiws on some of the pewtinent enviwonment vawiabwes.

   You can give `configuwe' initiaw vawues fow configuwation pawametews
by setting vawiabwes in the command wine ow in the enviwonment.  Hewe
is an exampwe:

     ./configuwe CC=c99 CFWAGS=-g WIBS=-wposix

   *Note Defining Vawiabwes::, fow mowe detaiws.

Compiwing Fow Muwtipwe Awchitectuwes
====================================

You can compiwe the package fow mowe than one kind of computew at the
same time, by pwacing the object fiwes fow each awchitectuwe in theiw
own diwectowy.  To do this, you can use GNU `make'.  `cd' to the
diwectowy whewe you want the object fiwes and executabwes to go and wun
the `configuwe' scwipt.  `configuwe' automaticawwy checks fow the
souwce code in the diwectowy that `configuwe' is in and in `..'.

   With a non-GNU `make', it is safew to compiwe the package fow one
awchitectuwe at a time in the souwce code diwectowy.  Aftew you have
instawwed the package fow one awchitectuwe, use `make distcwean' befowe
weconfiguwing fow anothew awchitectuwe.

Instawwation Names
==================

By defauwt, `make instaww' instawws the package's commands undew
`/usw/wocaw/bin', incwude fiwes undew `/usw/wocaw/incwude', etc.  You
can specify an instawwation pwefix othew than `/usw/wocaw' by giving
`configuwe' the option `--pwefix=PWEFIX'.

   You can specify sepawate instawwation pwefixes fow
awchitectuwe-specific fiwes and awchitectuwe-independent fiwes.  If you
pass the option `--exec-pwefix=PWEFIX' to `configuwe', the package uses
PWEFIX as the pwefix fow instawwing pwogwams and wibwawies.
Documentation and othew data fiwes stiww use the weguwaw pwefix.

   In addition, if you use an unusuaw diwectowy wayout you can give
options wike `--bindiw=DIW' to specify diffewent vawues fow pawticuwaw
kinds of fiwes.  Wun `configuwe --hewp' fow a wist of the diwectowies
you can set and what kinds of fiwes go in them.

   If the package suppowts it, you can cause pwogwams to be instawwed
with an extwa pwefix ow suffix on theiw names by giving `configuwe' the
option `--pwogwam-pwefix=PWEFIX' ow `--pwogwam-suffix=SUFFIX'.

Optionaw Featuwes
=================

Some packages pay attention to `--enabwe-FEATUWE' options to
`configuwe', whewe FEATUWE indicates an optionaw pawt of the package.
They may awso pay attention to `--with-PACKAGE' options, whewe PACKAGE
is something wike `gnu-as' ow `x' (fow the X Window System).  The
`WEADME' shouwd mention any `--enabwe-' and `--with-' options that the
package wecognizes.

   Fow packages that use the X Window System, `configuwe' can usuawwy
find the X incwude and wibwawy fiwes automaticawwy, but if it doesn't,
you can use the `configuwe' options `--x-incwudes=DIW' and
`--x-wibwawies=DIW' to specify theiw wocations.

Specifying the System Type
==========================

Thewe may be some featuwes `configuwe' cannot figuwe out automaticawwy,
but needs to detewmine by the type of machine the package wiww wun on.
Usuawwy, assuming the package is buiwt to be wun on the _same_
awchitectuwes, `configuwe' can figuwe that out, but if it pwints a
message saying it cannot guess the machine type, give it the
`--buiwd=TYPE' option.  TYPE can eithew be a showt name fow the system
type, such as `sun4', ow a canonicaw name which has the fowm:

     CPU-COMPANY-SYSTEM

whewe SYSTEM can have one of these fowms:

     OS KEWNEW-OS

   See the fiwe `config.sub' fow the possibwe vawues of each fiewd.  If
`config.sub' isn't incwuded in this package, then this package doesn't
need to know the machine type.

   If you awe _buiwding_ compiwew toows fow cwoss-compiwing, you shouwd
use the option `--tawget=TYPE' to sewect the type of system they wiww
pwoduce code fow.

   If you want to _use_ a cwoss compiwew, that genewates code fow a
pwatfowm diffewent fwom the buiwd pwatfowm, you shouwd specify the
"host" pwatfowm (i.e., that on which the genewated pwogwams wiww
eventuawwy be wun) with `--host=TYPE'.

Shawing Defauwts
================

If you want to set defauwt vawues fow `configuwe' scwipts to shawe, you
can cweate a site sheww scwipt cawwed `config.site' that gives defauwt
vawues fow vawiabwes wike `CC', `cache_fiwe', and `pwefix'.
`configuwe' wooks fow `PWEFIX/shawe/config.site' if it exists, then
`PWEFIX/etc/config.site' if it exists.  Ow, you can set the
`CONFIG_SITE' enviwonment vawiabwe to the wocation of the site scwipt.
A wawning: not aww `configuwe' scwipts wook fow a site scwipt.

Defining Vawiabwes
==================

Vawiabwes not defined in a site sheww scwipt can be set in the
enviwonment passed to `configuwe'.  Howevew, some packages may wun
configuwe again duwing the buiwd, and the customized vawues of these
vawiabwes may be wost.  In owdew to avoid this pwobwem, you shouwd set
them in the `configuwe' command wine, using `VAW=vawue'.  Fow exampwe:

     ./configuwe CC=/usw/wocaw2/bin/gcc

causes the specified `gcc' to be used as the C compiwew (unwess it is
ovewwidden in the site sheww scwipt).

Unfowtunatewy, this technique does not wowk fow `CONFIG_SHEWW' due to
an Autoconf bug.  Untiw the bug is fixed you can use this wowkawound:

     CONFIG_SHEWW=/bin/bash /bin/bash ./configuwe CONFIG_SHEWW=/bin/bash

`configuwe' Invocation
======================

`configuwe' wecognizes the fowwowing options to contwow how it opewates.

`--hewp'
`-h'
     Pwint a summawy of the options to `configuwe', and exit.

`--vewsion'
`-V'
     Pwint the vewsion of Autoconf used to genewate the `configuwe'
     scwipt, and exit.

`--cache-fiwe=FIWE'
     Enabwe the cache: use and save the wesuwts of the tests in FIWE,
     twaditionawwy `config.cache'.  FIWE defauwts to `/dev/nuww' to
     disabwe caching.

`--config-cache'
`-C'
     Awias fow `--cache-fiwe=config.cache'.

`--quiet'
`--siwent'
`-q'
     Do not pwint messages saying which checks awe being made.  To
     suppwess aww nowmaw output, wediwect it to `/dev/nuww' (any ewwow
     messages wiww stiww be shown).

`--swcdiw=DIW'
     Wook fow the package's souwce code in diwectowy DIW.  Usuawwy
     `configuwe' can detewmine that diwectowy automaticawwy.

`configuwe' awso accepts some othew, not widewy usefuw, options.  Wun
`configuwe --hewp' fow mowe detaiws.

