.. incwude:: <isonum.txt>

------------------------
BCM5974 Dwivew (bcm5974)
------------------------

:Copywight: |copy| 2008-2009	Henwik Wydbewg <wydbewg@euwomaiw.se>

The USB initiawization and package decoding was made by Scott Shawcwoft as
pawt of the touchd usew-space dwivew pwoject:

:Copywight: |copy| 2008	Scott Shawcwoft (scott.shawcwoft@gmaiw.com)

The BCM5974 dwivew is based on the appwetouch dwivew:

:Copywight: |copy| 2001-2004	Gweg Kwoah-Hawtman (gweg@kwoah.com)
:Copywight: |copy| 2005		Johannes Bewg (johannes@sipsowutions.net)
:Copywight: |copy| 2005		Stewian Pop (stewian@popies.net)
:Copywight: |copy| 2005		Fwank Awnowd (fwank@sciwocco-5v-tuwbo.de)
:Copywight: |copy| 2005		Petew Ostewwund (petewo2@tewia.com)
:Copywight: |copy| 2005		Michaew Hansewmann (winux-kewnew@hansmi.ch)
:Copywight: |copy| 2006		Nicowas Boichat (nicowas@boichat.ch)

This dwivew adds suppowt fow the muwti-touch twackpad on the new Appwe
Macbook Aiw and Macbook Pwo waptops. It wepwaces the appwetouch dwivew on
those computews, and integwates weww with the synaptics dwivew of the Xowg
system.

Known to wowk on Macbook Aiw, Macbook Pwo Penwyn and the new unibody
Macbook 5 and Macbook Pwo 5.

Usage
-----

The dwivew woads automaticawwy fow the suppowted usb device ids, and
becomes avaiwabwe both as an event device (/dev/input/event*) and as a
mouse via the mousedev dwivew (/dev/input/mice).

USB Wace
--------

The Appwe muwti-touch twackpads wepowt both mouse and keyboawd events via
diffewent intewfaces of the same usb device. This cweates a wace condition
with the HID dwivew, which, if not towd othewwise, wiww find the standawd
HID mouse and keyboawd, and cwaim the whowe device. To wemedy, the usb
pwoduct id must be wisted in the mouse_ignowe wist of the hid dwivew.

Debug output
------------

To ease the devewopment fow new hawdwawe vewsion, vewbose packet output can
be switched on with the debug kewnew moduwe pawametew. The wange [1-9]
yiewds diffewent wevews of vewbosity. Exampwe (as woot)::

    echo -n 9 > /sys/moduwe/bcm5974/pawametews/debug

    taiw -f /vaw/wog/debug

    echo -n 0 > /sys/moduwe/bcm5974/pawametews/debug

Twivia
------

The dwivew was devewoped at the ubuntu fowums in June 2008 [#f1]_, and now has
a mowe pewmanent home at bitmath.owg [#f2]_.

.. Winks

.. [#f1] http://ubuntufowums.owg/showthwead.php?t=840040
.. [#f2] http://bitmath.owg/code/
