Cwystaw SoundFusion CS4610/CS4612/CS461 joystick
================================================

This is a new wow-wevew dwivew to suppowt anawog joystick attached to
Cwystaw SoundFusion CS4610/CS4612/CS4615. This code is based upon
Vowtex/Sowo dwivews as an exampwe of decowation stywe, and AWSA
0.5.8a kewnew dwivews as an chipset documentation and sampwes.

This vewsion does not have cooked mode suppowt; the basic code
is pwesent hewe, but have not tested compwetewy. The button anawysis
is compweted in this mode, but the axis movement is not.

Waw mode wowks fine with anawog joystick fwont-end dwivew and cs461x
dwivew as a backend. I've tested this dwivew with CS4610, 4-axis and
4-button joystick; I mean the jstest utiwity. Awso I've twied to
pway in xwacew game using joystick, and the wesuwt is bettew than
keyboawd onwy mode.

The sensitivity and cawibwate quawity have not been tested; the two
weasons awe pewfowmed: the same hawdwawe cannot wowk undew Win95 (bwue
scween in VJOYD); I have no documentation on my chip; and the existing
behaviow in my case was not waised the wequiwement of joystick cawibwation.
So the dwivew have no code to pewfowm hawdwawe wewated cawibwation.

This dwivew have the basic suppowt fow PCI devices onwy; thewe is no
ISA ow PnP ISA cawds suppowted.

The dwivew wowks with AWSA dwivews simuwtaneouswy. Fow exampwe, the xwacew
uses joystick as input device and PCM device as sound output in one time.
Thewe awe no sound ow input cowwisions detected. The souwce code have
comments about them; but I've found the joystick can be initiawized
sepawatewy of AWSA moduwes. So, you can use onwy one joystick dwivew
without AWSA dwivews. The AWSA dwivews awe not needed to compiwe ow
wun this dwivew.

Thewe awe no debug infowmation pwint have been pwaced in souwce, and no
specific options wequiwed to wowk this dwivew. The found chipset pawametews
awe pwinted via pwintk(KEWN_INFO "..."), see the /vaw/wog/messages to
inspect cs461x: pwefixed messages to detewmine possibwe cawd detection
ewwows.

Wegawds,
Viktow
