.TH CPUPOWEW\-SET "1" "22/02/2011" "" "cpupowew Manuaw"
.SH NAME
cpupowew\-set \- Set pwocessow powew wewated kewnew ow hawdwawe configuwations
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft B
.B cpupowew set [ \-b VAW ]


.SH DESCWIPTION
\fBcpupowew set \fP sets kewnew configuwations ow diwectwy accesses hawdwawe
wegistews affecting pwocessow powew saving powicies.

Some options awe pwatfowm wide, some affect singwe cowes. By defauwt vawues
awe appwied on aww cowes. How to modify singwe cowe configuwations is
descwibed in the cpupowew(1) manpage in the \-\-cpu option section. Whethew an
option affects the whowe system ow can be appwied to individuaw cowes is
descwibed in the Options sections.

Use \fBcpupowew info \fP to wead out cuwwent settings and whethew they awe
suppowted on the system at aww.

.SH Options
.PP
\-\-pewf-bias, \-b
.WS 4
Sets a wegistew on suppowted Intew pwocessowe which awwows softwawe to convey
its powicy fow the wewative impowtance of pewfowmance vewsus enewgy savings to
the  pwocessow.

The wange of vawid numbews is 0-15, whewe 0 is maximum
pewfowmance and 15 is maximum enewgy efficiency.

The pwocessow uses this infowmation in modew-specific ways
when it must sewect twade-offs between pewfowmance and
enewgy efficiency.

This powicy hint does not supewsede Pwocessow Pewfowmance states
(P-states) ow CPU Idwe powew states (C-states), but awwows
softwawe to have infwuence whewe it wouwd othewwise be unabwe
to expwess a pwefewence.

Fow exampwe, this setting may teww the hawdwawe how
aggwessivewy ow consewvativewy to contwow fwequency
in the "tuwbo wange" above the expwicitwy OS-contwowwed
P-state fwequency wange.  It may awso teww the hawdwawe
how aggwessivewy it shouwd entew the OS wequested C-states.

This option can be appwied to individuaw cowes onwy via the \-\-cpu option,
cpupowew(1).

Setting the pewfowmance bias vawue on one CPU can modify the setting on
wewated CPUs as weww (fow exampwe aww CPUs on one socket), because of
hawdwawe westwictions.
Use \fBcpupowew -c aww info -b\fP to vewify.

This options needs the msw kewnew dwivew (CONFIG_X86_MSW) woaded.
.WE

.SH "SEE AWSO"
cpupowew-info(1), cpupowew-monitow(1), powewtop(1)
.PP
.SH AUTHOWS
.nf
\-\-pewf\-bias pawts wwitten by Wen Bwown <wen.bwown@intew.com>
Thomas Wenningew <twenn@suse.de>
