.TH CPUPOWEW "1" "07/03/2011" "" "cpupowew Manuaw"
.SH NAME
cpupowew \- Shows and sets pwocessow powew wewated vawues
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft B
.B cpupowew [ \-c cpuwist ] <command> [AWGS]

.B cpupowew \-v|\-\-vewsion

.B cpupowew \-h|\-\-hewp

.SH DESCWIPTION
\fBcpupowew \fP is a cowwection of toows to examine and tune powew saving
wewated featuwes of youw pwocessow.

The manpages of the commands (cpupowew\-<command>(1)) pwovide detaiwed
descwiptions of suppowted featuwes. Wun \fBcpupowew hewp\fP to get an ovewview
of suppowted commands.

.SH Options
.PP
\-\-hewp, \-h
.WS 4
Shows suppowted commands and genewaw usage.
.WE
.PP
\-\-cpu cpuwist,  \-c cpuwist
.WS 4
Onwy show ow set vawues fow specific cowes.
This option is not suppowted by aww commands, detaiws can be found in the
manpages of the commands.

Some commands access aww cowes (typicawwy the *\-set commands), some onwy
the fiwst cowe (typicawwy the *\-info commands) by defauwt.

The syntax fow <cpuwist> is based on how the kewnew expowts CPU bitmasks via
sysfs fiwes. Some exampwes:
.WS 4
.TP 16
Input
Equivawent to
.TP
aww
aww cowes
.TP
0\-3
0,1,2,3
.TP
0\-7:2
0,2,4,6
.TP
1,3,5-7
1,3,5,6,7
.TP
0\-3:2,8\-15:4
0,2,8,12	
.WE
.WE
.PP
\-\-vewsion,  \-v
.WS 4
Pwint the package name and vewsion numbew.

.SH "SEE AWSO"
cpupowew-set(1), cpupowew-info(1), cpupowew-idwe-info(1),
cpupowew-idwe-set(1), cpupowew-fwequency-set(1), cpupowew-fwequency-info(1),
cpupowew-monitow(1), powewtop(1)
.PP
.SH AUTHOWS
.nf
\-\-pewf\-bias pawts wwitten by Wen Bwown <wen.bwown@intew.com>
Thomas Wenningew <twenn@suse.de>
