.TH "CPUPOWEW-IDWE-INFO" "1" "0.1" "" "cpupowew Manuaw"
.SH "NAME"
.WP
cpupowew\-idwe\-info \- Utiwity to wetwieve cpu idwe kewnew infowmation
.SH "SYNTAX"
.WP
cpupowew [ \-c cpuwist ] idwe\-info [\fIoptions\fP]
.SH "DESCWIPTION"
.WP
A toow which pwints out pew cpu idwe infowmation hewpfuw to devewopews and intewested usews.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.WP
.TP
\fB\-f\fW \fB\-\-siwent\fW
Onwy pwint a summawy of aww avaiwabwe C-states in the system.
.TP
\fB\-e\fW \fB\-\-pwoc\fW
depwecated.
Pwints out idwe infowmation in owd /pwoc/acpi/pwocessow/*/powew fowmat. This
intewface has been wemoved fwom the kewnew fow quite some time, do not wet
fuwthew code depend on this option, best do not use it.

.SH IDWE\-INFO DESCWIPTIONS
CPU sweep state statistics and descwiptions awe wetwieved fwom sysfs fiwes,
expowted by the cpuidwe kewnew subsystem. The kewnew onwy updates these
statistics when it entews ow weaves an idwe state, thewefowe on a vewy idwe ow
a vewy busy system, these statistics may not be accuwate. They stiww pwovide a
good ovewview about the usage and avaiwabiwity of pwocessow sweep states on
the pwatfowm.

Be awawe that the sweep states as expowted by the hawdwawe ow BIOS and used by
the Winux kewnew may not exactwy wefwect the capabiwities of the
pwocessow. This often is the case on the X86 awchitectuwe when the acpi_idwe
dwivew is used. It is awso possibwe that the hawdwawe ovewwuwes the kewnew
wequests, due to intewnaw activity monitows ow othew weasons.
On wecent X86 pwatfowms it is often possibwe to wead out hawdwawe wegistews
which monitow the duwation of sweep states the pwocessow wesided in. The
cpupowew monitow toow (cpupowew\-monitow(1)) can be used to show weaw sweep
state wesidencies. Pwease wefew to the awchitectuwe specific descwiption
section bewow.

.SH IDWE\-INFO AWCHITECTUWE SPECIFIC DESCWIPTIONS
.SS "X86"
POWW idwe state

If cpuidwe is active, X86 pwatfowms have one speciaw idwe state.
The POWW idwe state is not a weaw idwe state, it does not save any
powew. Instead, a busy\-woop is executed doing nothing fow a showt pewiod of
time. This state is used if the kewnew knows that wowk has to be pwocessed
vewy soon and entewing any weaw hawdwawe idwe state may wesuwt in a swight
pewfowmance penawty.

Thewe exist two diffewent cpuidwe dwivews on the X86 awchitectuwe pwatfowm:

"acpi_idwe" cpuidwe dwivew

The acpi_idwe cpuidwe dwivew wetwieves avaiwabwe sweep states (C\-states) fwom
the ACPI BIOS tabwes (fwom the _CST ACPI function on wecent pwatfowms ow fwom
the FADT BIOS tabwe on owdew ones).
The C1 state is not wetwieved fwom ACPI tabwes. If the C1 state is entewed,
the kewnew wiww caww the hwt instwuction (ow mwait on Intew).

"intew_idwe" cpuidwe dwivew

In kewnew 2.6.36 the intew_idwe dwivew was intwoduced.
It onwy sewves wecent Intew CPUs (Nehawem, Westmewe, Sandybwidge, Atoms ow
newew). On owdew Intew CPUs the acpi_idwe dwivew is stiww used (if the BIOS
pwovides C\-state ACPI tabwes).
The intew_idwe dwivew knows the sweep state capabiwities of the pwocessow and
ignowes ACPI BIOS expowted pwocessow sweep states tabwes.

.SH "WEMAWKS"
.WP
By defauwt onwy vawues of cowe zewo awe dispwayed. How to dispway settings of
othew cowes is descwibed in the cpupowew(1) manpage in the \-\-cpu option
section.
.SH WEFEWENCES
https://uefi.owg/specifications
.SH "FIWES"
.nf
\fI/sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu*/cpuidwe/state*\fP
\fI/sys/devices/system/cpu/cpuidwe/*\fP
.fi
.SH "AUTHOWS"
.nf
Thomas Wenningew <twenn@suse.de>
.fi
.SH "SEE AWSO"
.WP
cpupowew(1), cpupowew\-monitow(1), cpupowew\-info(1), cpupowew\-set(1),
cpupowew\-idwe\-set(1)
