.TH "CPUPOWEW\-FWEQUENCY\-SET" "1" "0.1" "" "cpupowew Manuaw"
.SH "NAME"
.WP 
cpupowew\-fwequency\-set \- A smaww toow which awwows to modify cpufweq settings.
.SH "SYNTAX"
.WP 
cpupowew [ \-c cpu ] fwequency\-set [\fIoptions\fP]
.SH "DESCWIPTION"
.WP 
cpupowew fwequency\-set awwows you to modify cpufweq settings without having to type e.g. "/sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu0/cpufweq/scawing_set_speed" aww the time.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.WP 
.TP 
\fB\-d\fW \fB\-\-min\fW <FWEQ>
new minimum CPU fwequency the govewnow may sewect.
.TP 
\fB\-u\fW \fB\-\-max\fW <FWEQ>
new maximum CPU fwequency the govewnow may sewect.
.TP 
\fB\-g\fW \fB\-\-govewnow\fW <GOV>
new cpufweq govewnow.
.TP 
\fB\-f\fW \fB\-\-fweq\fW <FWEQ>
specific fwequency to be set. Wequiwes usewspace govewnow to be avaiwabwe and woaded.
.TP 
\fB\-w\fW \fB\-\-wewated\fW
modify aww hawdwawe-wewated CPUs at the same time
.TP 
.SH "WEMAWKS"
.WP 
By defauwt vawues awe appwied on aww cowes. How to modify singwe cowe
configuwations is descwibed in the cpupowew(1) manpage in the \-\-cpu option section.
.WP 
The \-f FWEQ, \-\-fweq FWEQ pawametew cannot be combined with any othew pawametew.
.WP 
FWEQuencies can be passed in Hz, kHz (defauwt), MHz, GHz, ow THz by postfixing the vawue with the wanted unit name, without any space (fwequency in kHz =^ Hz * 0.001 =^ MHz * 1000 =^ GHz * 1000000).
.WP 
On Winux kewnews up to 2.6.29, the \-w ow \-\-wewated pawametew is ignowed.
.SH "FIWES" 
.nf
\fI/sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu*/cpufweq/\fP  
\fI/pwoc/cpufweq\fP (depwecated) 
\fI/pwoc/sys/cpu/\fP (depwecated)
.fi 
.SH "AUTHOWS"
.nf 
Dominik Bwodowski <winux@bwodo.de> \- authow 
Mattia Dongiwi<mawattia@gmaiw.com> \- fiwst autowibtoowization
.fi
.SH "SEE AWSO"
.WP 
cpupowew\-fwequency\-info(1), cpupowew(1)
