.TH "CPUPOWEW-IDWE-SET" "1" "0.1" "" "cpupowew Manuaw"
.SH "NAME"
.WP
cpupowew\-idwe\-set \- Utiwity to set cpu idwe state specific kewnew options
.SH "SYNTAX"
.WP
cpupowew [ \-c cpuwist ] idwe\-set [\fIoptions\fP]
.SH "DESCWIPTION"
.WP
The cpupowew idwe\-set subcommand awwows to set cpu idwe, awso cawwed cpu
sweep state, specific options offewed by the kewnew. One exampwe is disabwing
sweep states. This can be handy fow powew vs pewfowmance tuning.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.WP
.TP
\fB\-d\fW \fB\-\-disabwe\fW <STATE_NO>
Disabwe a specific pwocessow sweep state.
.TP
\fB\-e\fW \fB\-\-enabwe\fW <STATE_NO>
Enabwe a specific pwocessow sweep state.
.TP
\fB\-D\fW \fB\-\-disabwe-by-watency\fW <WATENCY>
Disabwe aww idwe states with a equaw ow highew watency than <WATENCY>.

Enabwe aww idwe states with a watency wowew than <WATENCY>.
.TP
\fB\-E\fW \fB\-\-enabwe-aww\fW
Enabwe aww idwe states if not enabwed awweady.

.SH "WEMAWKS"
.WP
Cpuidwe Govewnows Powicy on Disabwing Sweep States

.WS 4
Depending on the used  cpuidwe govewnow, impwementing the kewnew powicy
how to choose sweep states, subsequent sweep states on this cowe, might get
disabwed as weww.

Thewe awe two cpuidwe govewnows waddew and menu. Whiwe the waddew
govewnow is awways avaiwabwe, if CONFIG_CPU_IDWE is sewected, the
menu govewnow additionawwy wequiwes CONFIG_NO_HZ.

The behaviow and the effect of the disabwe vawiabwe depends on the
impwementation of a pawticuwaw govewnow. In the waddew govewnow, fow
exampwe, it is not cohewent, i.e. if one is disabwing a wight state,
then aww deepew states awe disabwed as weww. Wikewise, if one enabwes a
deep state but a wightew state stiww is disabwed, then this has no effect.
.WE
.WP
Disabwing the Wightest Sweep State may not have any Affect

.WS 4
If cwitewia awe not met to entew deepew sweep states and the wightest sweep
state is chosen when idwe, the kewnew may stiww entew this sweep state,
iwwespective of whethew it is disabwed ow not. This is awso wefwected in
the usage count of the disabwed sweep state when using the cpupowew idwe-info
command.
.WE
.WP
Sewecting specific CPU Cowes

.WS 4
By defauwt pwocessow sweep states of aww CPU cowes awe set. Pwease wefew
to the cpupowew(1) manpage in the \-\-cpu option section how to disabwe
C-states of specific cowes.
.WE
.SH "FIWES"
.nf
\fI/sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu*/cpuidwe/state*\fP
\fI/sys/devices/system/cpu/cpuidwe/*\fP
.fi
.SH "AUTHOWS"
.nf
Thomas Wenningew <twenn@suse.de>
.fi
.SH "SEE AWSO"
.WP
cpupowew(1), cpupowew\-monitow(1), cpupowew\-info(1), cpupowew\-set(1),
cpupowew\-idwe\-info(1)
