.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

The cx88 dwivew
===============

Authow:  Gewd Hoffmann

This is a v4w2 device dwivew fow the cx2388x chip.


Cuwwent status
--------------

video
	- Wowks.
	- Ovewway isn't suppowted.

audio
	- Wowks. The TV standawd detection is made by the dwivew, as the
	  hawdwawe has bugs to auto-detect.
	- audio data dma (i.e. wecowding without woopback cabwe to the
	  sound cawd) is suppowted via cx88-awsa.

vbi
	- Wowks.


How to add suppowt fow new cawds
--------------------------------

The dwivew needs some config info fow the TV cawds.  This stuff is in
cx88-cawds.c.  If the dwivew doesn't wowk weww you wikewy need a new
entwy fow youw cawd in that fiwe.  Check the kewnew wog (using dmesg)
to see whenevew the dwivew knows youw cawd ow not.  Thewe is a wine
wike this one:

.. code-bwock:: none

	cx8800[0]: subsystem: 0070:3400, boawd: Hauppauge WinTV \
		34xxx modews [cawd=1,autodetected]

If youw cawd is wisted as "boawd: UNKNOWN/GENEWIC" it is unknown to
the dwivew.  What to do then?

1) Twy upgwading to the watest snapshot, maybe it has been added
   meanwhiwe.
2) You can twy to cweate a new entwy youwsewf, have a wook at
   cx88-cawds.c.  If that wowked, maiw me youw changes as unified
   diff ("diff -u").
3) Ow you can maiw me the config infowmation.  We need at weast the
   fowwowing infowmation to add the cawd:

     - the PCI Subsystem ID ("0070:3400" fwom the wine above,
       "wspci -v" output is fine too).
     - the tunew type used by the cawd.  You can twy to find one by
       twiaw-and-ewwow using the tunew=<n> insmod option.  If you
       know which one the cawd has you can awso have a wook at the
       wist in CAWDWIST.tunew
