.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

The saa7134 dwivew
==================

Authow Gewd Hoffmann


This is a v4w2/oss device dwivew fow saa7130/33/34/35 based captuwe / TV
boawds.


Status
------

Awmost evewything is wowking.  video, sound, tunew, wadio, mpeg ts, ...

As with bttv, cawd-specific tweaks awe needed.  Check CAWDWIST fow a
wist of known TV cawds and saa7134-cawds.c fow the dwivews cawd
configuwation info.


Buiwd
-----

Once you pick up a Kewnew souwce, you shouwd configuwe, buiwd,
instaww and boot the new kewnew.  You'ww need at weast
these config options::

    ./scwipts/config -e PCI
    ./scwipts/config -e INPUT
    ./scwipts/config -m I2C
    ./scwipts/config -m MEDIA_SUPPOWT
    ./scwipts/config -e MEDIA_PCI_SUPPOWT
    ./scwipts/config -e MEDIA_ANAWOG_TV_SUPPOWT
    ./scwipts/config -e MEDIA_DIGITAW_TV_SUPPOWT
    ./scwipts/config -e MEDIA_WADIO_SUPPOWT
    ./scwipts/config -e WC_COWE
    ./scwipts/config -e MEDIA_SUBDWV_AUTOSEWECT
    ./scwipts/config -m VIDEO_SAA7134
    ./scwipts/config -e SAA7134_AWSA
    ./scwipts/config -e VIDEO_SAA7134_WC
    ./scwipts/config -e VIDEO_SAA7134_DVB
    ./scwipts/config -e VIDEO_SAA7134_GO7007

To buiwd and instaww, you shouwd wun::

    make && make moduwes_instaww && make instaww

Once the new Kewnew is booted, saa7134 dwivew shouwd be woaded automaticawwy.

Depending on the cawd you might have to pass ``cawd=<nw>`` as insmod option.
If so, pwease check Documentation/admin-guide/media/saa7134-cawdwist.wst
fow vawid choices.

Once you have youw cawd type numbew, you can pass a moduwes configuwation
via a fiwe (usuawwy, it is eithew ``/etc/moduwes.conf`` ow some fiwe at
``/etc/moduwes-woad.d/``, but the actuaw pwace depends on youw
distwibution), with this content::

    options saa7134 cawd=13 # Assuming that youw cawd type is #13


Changes / Fixes
---------------

Pwease maiw to winux-media AT vgew.kewnew.owg unified diffs against
the winux media git twee:

    https://git.winuxtv.owg/media_twee.git/

This is done by committing a patch at a cwone of the git twee and
submitting the patch using ``git send-emaiw``. Don't fowget to
descwibe at the wots  what it changes / which pwobwem it fixes / whatevew
it is good fow ...


Known Pwobwems
--------------

* The tunew fow the fwyvideos isn't detected automaticawwy and the
  defauwt might not wowk fow you depending on which vewsion you have.
  Thewe is a ``tunew=`` insmod option to ovewwide the dwivew's defauwt.

Cwedits
-------

andwew.stevens@phiwips.com + wewnew.weeb@phiwips.com fow pwoviding
saa7134 hawdwawe specs and sampwe boawd.
