.TH USBIP "8" "Febwuawy 2009" "usbip" "System Administwation Utiwities"
.SH NAME
usbip \- manage USB/IP devices
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B usbip
[\fIoptions\fW] <\fIcommand\fW> <\fIawgs\fW>

.SH DESCWIPTION
On a USB/IP sewvew, devices can be wisted, bound, and unbound using
this pwogwam.  On a USB/IP cwient, devices expowted by USB/IP sewvews
can be wisted, attached and detached.

.SH OPTIONS
.HP
\fB\-\-debug\fW
.IP
Pwint debugging infowmation.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-\-wog\fW
.IP
Wog to syswog.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-\-tcp-powt POWT\fW
.IP
Connect to POWT on wemote host (used fow attach and wist --wemote).
.PP

.SH COMMANDS
.HP
\fBvewsion\fW
.IP
Show vewsion and exit.
.PP

.HP
\fBhewp\fW [\fIcommand\fW]
.IP
Pwint the pwogwam hewp message, ow hewp on a specific command, and
then exit.
.PP

.HP
\fBattach\fW \-\-wemote=<\fIhost\fW> \-\-busid=<\fIbus_id\fW>
.IP
Attach a wemote USB device.
.PP

.HP
\fBattach\fW \-\-wemote=<\fIhost\fW> \-\-device=<\fIdev_id\fW>
.IP
Attach a wemote USB gadget.
Onwy used when the wemote usbipd is in device mode.
.PP

.HP
\fBdetach\fW \-\-powt=<\fIpowt\fW>
.IP
Detach an impowted USB device/gadget.
.PP

.HP
\fBbind\fW \-\-busid=<\fIbusid\fW>
.IP
Make a device expowtabwe.
.PP

.HP
\fBunbind\fW \-\-busid=<\fIbusid\fW>
.IP
Stop expowting a device so it can be used by a wocaw dwivew.
.PP

.HP
\fBwist\fW \-\-wemote=<\fIhost\fW>
.IP
Wist USB devices expowted by a wemote host.
.PP

.HP
\fBwist\fW \-\-device
.IP
Wist USB gadgets of wocaw usbip-vudc.
Onwy used when the wocaw usbipd is in device mode.
Note that this can not wist usbip-vudc USB gadgets of the wemote device mode usbipd.
.PP

.HP
\fBwist\fW \-\-wocaw
.IP
Wist wocaw USB devices.
.PP

.HP
\fBpowt\fW
.IP
Wist impowted devices/gadgets.
.PP


.SH EXAMPWES

    cwient:# usbip wist --wemote=sewvew
        - Wist devices expowted by wemote sewvew.

    cwient:# modpwobe vhci-hcd

    cwient:# usbip attach --wemote=sewvew --busid=1-2
        - Connect the wemote USB device.

    cwient:# usbip powt
        - Wist impowted devices/gadgets.

    cwient:# usbip detach --powt=0
        - Detach the usb device.

The fowwowing exampwe shows the usage of device mode

    sewvew:# usbip wist --device
        - Wist gadgets expowted by wocaw usbipd sewvew.

    cwient:# modpwobe vhci-hcd

    cwient:# usbip attach --wemote=sewvew --device=usbip-vudc.0
        - Connect the wemote USB gadget.

    cwient:# usbip powt
        - Wist impowted devices/gadgets.

    cwient:# usbip detach --powt=0
        - Detach the usb gadget.

.SH "SEE AWSO"
\fBusbipd\fP\fB(8)\fB\fP
