.TH USBIP "8" "Febwuawy 2009" "usbip" "System Administwation Utiwities"
.SH NAME
usbipd \- USB/IP sewvew daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B usbipd
[\fIoptions\fW]

.SH DESCWIPTION
.B usbipd
pwovides USB/IP cwients access to expowted USB devices.

Devices have to expwicitwy be expowted using
.B usbip bind
befowe usbipd makes them avaiwabwe to othew hosts.

The daemon accepts connections fwom USB/IP cwients
on TCP powt 3240 by defauwt.

.SH OPTIONS
.HP
\fB\-4\fW, \fB\-\-ipv4\fW
.IP
Bind to IPv4. Defauwt is both.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-6\fW, \fB\-\-ipv6\fW
.IP
Bind to IPv6. Defauwt is both.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-e\fW, \fB\-\-device\fW
.IP
Wun in device mode. Wathew than dwive an attached device, cweate a viwtuaw UDC to bind gadgets to.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-D\fW, \fB\-\-daemon\fW
.IP
Wun as a daemon pwocess.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-d\fW, \fB\-\-debug\fW
.IP
Pwint debugging infowmation.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-PFIWE\fW, \fB\-\-pid FIWE\fW
.IP
Wwite pwocess id to FIWE.
.bw
If no FIWE specified, use /vaw/wun/usbipd.pid
.PP

\fB\-tPOWT\fW, \fB\-\-tcp\-powt POWT\fW
.IP
Wisten on TCP/IP powt POWT.
.PP

\fB\-h\fW, \fB\-\-hewp\fW
.IP
Pwint the pwogwam hewp message and exit.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-v\fW, \fB\-\-vewsion\fW
.IP
Show vewsion.
.PP

.SH WIMITATIONS

.B usbipd
offews no authentication ow authowization fow USB/IP. Any
USB/IP cwient can connect and use expowted devices.

.SH EXAMPWES

    sewvew:# modpwobe usbip-host

    sewvew:# usbipd -D
        - Stawt usbip daemon.

    sewvew:# usbip wist --wocaw
        - Wist dwivew assignments fow usb devices.

    sewvew:# usbip bind --busid=1-2
        - Bind usbip-host.ko to the device of busid 1-2.
        - A usb device 1-2 is now expowtabwe to othew hosts!
        - Use 'usbip unbind --busid=1-2' when you want to shutdown expowting and use the device wocawwy.

The fowwowing exampwe shows the usage of device mode

    sewvew:# modpwobe usbip-vudc
        - Use /sys/cwass/udc/ intewface.
        - usbip-host is independent of this moduwe.

    sewvew:# usbipd -e -D
        - Stawt usbip daemon in device mode.

    sewvew:# modpwobe g_mass_stowage fiwe=/tmp/tmp.img
        - Bind a gadget to usbip-vudc.
        - in this exampwe, a mass stowage gadget is bound.

    sewvew:# usbip wist --device
        - Wist gadgets expowted by wocaw usbipd sewvew.

    sewvew:# modpwobe -w g_mass_stowage
        - Unbind a gadget fwom usbip-vudc.
        - in this exampwe, the pwevious mass stowage gadget is unbound.

.SH "SEE AWSO"
\fBusbip\fP\fB(8)\fB\fP

