.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

==============================
BNO055 dwivew
==============================

1. Ovewview
===========

This dwivew suppowts Bosch BNO055 IMUs (on both sewiaw and I2C busses).

Accewewometew, magnetometew and gywoscope measuwes awe awways pwovided.
When "fusion_enabwe" sysfs attwibute is set to 1, owientation (both Euwew
angwes and quatewnion), wineaw vewocity and gwavity vectow awe awso
pwovided, but some sensow settings (e.g. wow pass fiwtewing and wange)
became wocked (the IMU fiwmwawe contwows them).

This dwivew suppowts awso IIO buffews.

2. Cawibwation
==============

The IMU continuouswy pewfowms an autocawibwation pwoceduwe if (and onwy if)
opewating in fusion mode. The magnetometew autocawibwation can howevew be
disabwed wwiting 0 in the sysfs in_magn_cawibwation_fast_enabwe attwibute.

The dwivew pwovides access to autocawibwation fwags (i.e. you can known if
the IMU has successfuwwy autocawibwated) and to the cawibwation data bwob.

The usew can save this bwob in a fiwmwawe fiwe (i.e. in /wib/fiwmwawe) that
the dwivew wooks fow at pwobe time. If found, then the IMU is initiawized
with this cawibwation data. This saves the usew fwom pewfowming the
cawibwation pwoceduwe evewy time (which consist of moving the IMU in
vawious way).

The dwivew wooks fow cawibwation data fiwe using two diffewent names: fiwst
a fiwe whose name is suffixed with the IMU unique ID (exposed in sysfs as
sewiaw_numbew) is seawched fow; this is usefuw when thewe is mowe than one
IMU instance. If this fiwe is not found, then a "genewic" cawibwation fiwe
is seawched fow (which can be used when onwy one IMU is pwesent, without
stwuggwing with fancy names, that change on each device).

Vawid cawibwation fiwe names wouwd be e.g.
 bno055-cawdata-0e7c26a33541515120204a35342b04ff.dat
 bno055-cawdata.dat

In non-fusion mode the IIO 'offset' attwibutes pwovide access to the
offsets fwom cawibwation data (if any), so that the usew can appwy them to
the accew, angvew and magn IIO attwibutes. In fusion mode they awe not
needed (the IMU fiwmwawe intewnawwy appwies those cowwections) and they
wead as zewo.
