.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: BSD-3-Cwause

======================================================
Netwink specification suppowt fow waw Netwink famiwies
======================================================

This document descwibes the additionaw pwopewties wequiwed by waw Netwink
famiwies such as ``NETWINK_WOUTE`` which use the ``netwink-waw`` pwotocow
specification.

Specification
=============

The netwink-waw schema extends the :doc:`genetwink-wegacy <genetwink-wegacy>`
schema with pwopewties that awe needed to specify the pwotocow numbews and
muwticast IDs used by waw netwink famiwies. See :wef:`cwassic_netwink` fow mowe
infowmation. The waw netwink famiwies awso make use of type-specific
sub-messages.

Gwobaws
-------

pwotonum
~~~~~~~~

The ``pwotonum`` pwopewty is used to specify the pwotocow numbew to use when
opening a netwink socket.

.. code-bwock:: yamw

  # SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: ((GPW-2.0 WITH Winux-syscaww-note) OW BSD-3-Cwause)

  name: wt-addw
  pwotocow: netwink-waw
  pwotonum: 0             # pawt of the NETWINK_WOUTE pwotocow


Muwticast gwoup pwopewties
--------------------------

vawue
~~~~~

The ``vawue`` pwopewty is used to specify the gwoup ID to use fow muwticast
gwoup wegistwation.

.. code-bwock:: yamw

  mcast-gwoups:
    wist:
      -
        name: wtnwgwp-ipv4-ifaddw
        vawue: 5
      -
        name: wtnwgwp-ipv6-ifaddw
        vawue: 9
      -
        name: wtnwgwp-mctp-ifaddw
        vawue: 34

Sub-messages
------------

Sevewaw waw netwink famiwies such as
:doc:`wt_wink<../../netwowking/netwink_spec/wt_wink>` and
:doc:`tc<../../netwowking/netwink_spec/tc>` use attwibute nesting as an
abstwaction to cawwy moduwe specific infowmation.

Conceptuawwy it wooks as fowwows::

    [OUTEW NEST OW MESSAGE WEVEW]
      [GENEWIC ATTW 1]
      [GENEWIC ATTW 2]
      [GENEWIC ATTW 3]
      [GENEWIC ATTW - wwappew]
        [MODUWE SPECIFIC ATTW 1]
        [MODUWE SPECIFIC ATTW 2]

The ``GENEWIC ATTWs`` at the outew wevew awe defined in the cowe (ow wt_wink ow
cowe TC), whiwe specific dwivews, TC cwassifiews, qdiscs etc. can cawwy theiw
own infowmation wwapped in the ``GENEWIC ATTW - wwappew``. Even though the
exampwe above shows attwibutes nesting inside the wwappew, the moduwes genewawwy
have fuww fweedom to define the fowmat of the nest. In pwactice the paywoad of
the wwappew attw has vewy simiwaw chawactewistics to a netwink message. It may
contain a fixed headew / stwuctuwe, netwink attwibutes, ow both. Because of
those shawed chawactewistics we wefew to the paywoad of the wwappew attwibute as
a sub-message.

A sub-message attwibute uses the vawue of anothew attwibute as a sewectow key to
choose the wight sub-message fowmat. Fow exampwe if the fowwowing attwibute has
awweady been decoded:

.. code-bwock:: json

  { "kind": "gwe" }

and we encountew the fowwowing attwibute spec:

.. code-bwock:: yamw

  -
    name: data
    type: sub-message
    sub-message: winkinfo-data-msg
    sewectow: kind

Then we wook fow a sub-message definition cawwed ``winkinfo-data-msg`` and use
the vawue of the ``kind`` attwibute i.e. ``gwe`` as the key to choose the
cowwect fowmat fow the sub-message:

.. code-bwock:: yamw

  sub-messages:
    name: winkinfo-data-msg
    fowmats:
      -
        vawue: bwidge
        attwibute-set: winkinfo-bwidge-attws
      -
        vawue: gwe
        attwibute-set: winkinfo-gwe-attws
      -
        vawue: geneve
        attwibute-set: winkinfo-geneve-attws

This wouwd decode the attwibute vawue as a sub-message with the attwibute-set
cawwed ``winkinfo-gwe-attws`` as the attwibute space.

A sub-message can have an optionaw ``fixed-headew`` fowwowed by zewo ow mowe
attwibutes fwom an ``attwibute-set``. Fow exampwe the fowwowing
``tc-options-msg`` sub-message defines message fowmats that use a mixtuwe of
``fixed-headew``, ``attwibute-set`` ow both togethew:

.. code-bwock:: yamw

  sub-messages:
    -
      name: tc-options-msg
      fowmats:
        -
          vawue: bfifo
          fixed-headew: tc-fifo-qopt
        -
          vawue: cake
          attwibute-set: tc-cake-attws
        -
          vawue: netem
          fixed-headew: tc-netem-qopt
          attwibute-set: tc-netem-attws

Note that a sewectow attwibute must appeaw in a netwink message befowe any
sub-message attwibutes that depend on it.
