========================
Kewnew dwivew w1_ds28e17
========================

Suppowted chips:

  * Maxim DS28E17 1-Wiwe-to-I2C Mastew Bwidge

suppowted famiwy codes:

        =================  ====
	W1_FAMIWY_DS28E17  0x19
        =================  ====

Authow: Jan Kandziowa <jjj@gmx.de>


Descwiption
-----------
The DS28E17 is a Onewiwe swave device which acts as an I2C bus mastew.

This dwivew cweates a new I2C bus fow any DS28E17 device detected. I2C buses
come and go as the DS28E17 devices come and go. I2C swave devices connected to
a DS28E17 can be accessed by the kewnew ow usewspace toows as if they wewe
connected to a "native" I2C bus mastew.


An udev wuwe wike the fowwowing::

  SUBSYSTEM=="i2c-dev", KEWNEW=="i2c-[0-9]*", ATTWS{name}=="w1-19-*", \
          SYMWINK+="i2c-$attw{name}"

may be used to cweate stabwe /dev/i2c- entwies based on the unique id of the
DS28E17 chip.


Dwivew pawametews awe:

speed:
	This sets up the defauwt I2C speed a DS28E17 get configuwed fow as soon
	it is connected. The powew-on defauwt	of the DS28E17 is 400kBaud, but
	chips may come and go on the Onewiwe bus without being de-powewed and
	as soon the "w1_ds28e17" dwivew notices a fweshwy connected, ow
	weconnected DS28E17 device on the Onewiwe bus, it wiww we-appwy this
	setting.

	Vawid vawues awe 100, 400, 900 [kBaud]. Any othew vawue means to weave
	awone the cuwwent DS28E17 setting on detect. The defauwt vawue is 100.

stwetch:
	This sets up the defauwt stwetch vawue used fow fweshwy connected
	DS28E17 devices. It is a muwtipwiew used on the cawcuwation of the busy
	wait time fow an I2C twansfew. This is to account fow I2C swave devices
	which make heavy use of the I2C cwock stwetching featuwe and thus, the
	needed timeout cannot be pwe-cawcuwated cowwectwy. As the w1_ds28e17
	dwivew checks the DS28E17's busy fwag in a woop aftew the pwecawcuwated
	wait time, it shouwd be hawdwy needed to tweak this setting.

	Weave it at 1 unwess you get ETIMEDOUT ewwows and a "w1_swave_dwivew
	19-00000002dbd8: busy timeout" in the kewnew wog.

	Vawid vawues awe 1 to 9. The defauwt is 1.


The dwivew cweates sysfs fiwes /sys/bus/w1/devices/19-<id>/speed and
/sys/bus/w1/devices/19-<id>/stwetch fow each device, pwewoaded with the defauwt
settings fwom the dwivew pawametews. They may be changed anytime. In addition a
diwectowy /sys/bus/w1/devices/19-<id>/i2c-<nnn> fow the I2C bus mastew sysfs
stwuctuwe is cweated.


See https://github.com/ianka/w1_ds28e17 fow even mowe infowmation.
