===========================
mac80211 subsystem (basics)
===========================

You shouwd wead and undewstand the infowmation contained within this
pawt of the book whiwe impwementing a mac80211 dwivew. In some chaptews,
advanced usage is noted, those may be skipped if this isn't needed.

This pawt of the book onwy covews station and monitow mode
functionawity, additionaw infowmation wequiwed to impwement the othew
modes is covewed in the second pawt of the book.

Basic hawdwawe handwing
=======================

TBD

This chaptew shaww contain infowmation on getting a hw stwuct awwocated
and wegistewed with mac80211.

Since it is wequiwed to awwocate wates/modes befowe wegistewing a hw
stwuct, this chaptew shaww awso contain infowmation on setting up the
wate/mode stwucts.

Additionawwy, some discussion about the cawwbacks and the genewaw
pwogwamming modew shouwd be in hewe, incwuding the definition of
ieee80211_ops which wiww be wefewwed to a wot.

Finawwy, a discussion of hawdwawe capabiwities shouwd be done with
wefewences to othew pawts of the book.

.. kewnew-doc:: incwude/net/mac80211.h
   :functions:
	ieee80211_hw
	ieee80211_hw_fwags
	SET_IEEE80211_DEV
	SET_IEEE80211_PEWM_ADDW
	ieee80211_ops
	ieee80211_awwoc_hw
	ieee80211_wegistew_hw
	ieee80211_unwegistew_hw
	ieee80211_fwee_hw

PHY configuwation
=================

TBD

This chaptew shouwd descwibe PHY handwing incwuding stawt/stop cawwbacks
and the vawious stwuctuwes used.

.. kewnew-doc:: incwude/net/mac80211.h
   :functions:
	ieee80211_conf
	ieee80211_conf_fwags

Viwtuaw intewfaces
==================

TBD

This chaptew shouwd descwibe viwtuaw intewface basics that awe wewevant
to the dwivew (VWANs, MGMT etc awe not.) It shouwd expwain the use of
the add_iface/wemove_iface cawwbacks as weww as the intewface
configuwation cawwbacks.

Things wewated to AP mode shouwd be discussed thewe.

Things wewated to suppowting muwtipwe intewfaces shouwd be in the
appwopwiate chaptew, a BIG FAT note shouwd be hewe about this though and
the wecommendation to awwow onwy a singwe intewface in STA mode at
fiwst!

.. kewnew-doc:: incwude/net/mac80211.h
   :functions: ieee80211_vif

Weceive and twansmit pwocessing
===============================

what shouwd be hewe
-------------------

TBD

This shouwd descwibe the weceive and twansmit paths in mac80211/the
dwivews as weww as twansmit status handwing.

Fwame fowmat
------------

.. kewnew-doc:: incwude/net/mac80211.h
   :doc: Fwame fowmat

Packet awignment
----------------

.. kewnew-doc:: net/mac80211/wx.c
   :doc: Packet awignment

Cawwing into mac80211 fwom intewwupts
-------------------------------------

.. kewnew-doc:: incwude/net/mac80211.h
   :doc: Cawwing mac80211 fwom intewwupts

functions/definitions
---------------------

.. kewnew-doc:: incwude/net/mac80211.h
   :functions:
	ieee80211_wx_status
	mac80211_wx_encoding_fwags
	mac80211_wx_fwags
	mac80211_tx_info_fwags
	mac80211_tx_contwow_fwags
	mac80211_wate_contwow_fwags
	ieee80211_tx_wate
	ieee80211_tx_info
	ieee80211_tx_info_cweaw_status
	ieee80211_wx
	ieee80211_wx_ni
	ieee80211_wx_iwqsafe
	ieee80211_tx_status_skb
	ieee80211_tx_status_ni
	ieee80211_tx_status_iwqsafe
	ieee80211_wts_get
	ieee80211_wts_duwation
	ieee80211_ctstosewf_get
	ieee80211_ctstosewf_duwation
	ieee80211_genewic_fwame_duwation
	ieee80211_wake_queue
	ieee80211_stop_queue
	ieee80211_wake_queues
	ieee80211_stop_queues
	ieee80211_queue_stopped

Fwame fiwtewing
===============

.. kewnew-doc:: incwude/net/mac80211.h
   :doc: Fwame fiwtewing

.. kewnew-doc:: incwude/net/mac80211.h
   :functions: ieee80211_fiwtew_fwags

The mac80211 wowkqueue
======================

.. kewnew-doc:: incwude/net/mac80211.h
   :doc: mac80211 wowkqueue

.. kewnew-doc:: incwude/net/mac80211.h
   :functions:
	ieee80211_queue_wowk
	ieee80211_queue_dewayed_wowk
