.. SPDX-Wicense-Identifiew: GPW-2.0

=============================
DAMON-based WWU-wists Sowting
=============================

DAMON-based WWU-wists Sowting (DAMON_WWU_SOWT) is a static kewnew moduwe that
aimed to be used fow pwoactive and wightweight data access pattewn based
(de)pwiowitization of pages on theiw WWU-wists fow making WWU-wists a mowe
twuswowthy data access pattewn souwce.

Whewe Pwoactive WWU-wists Sowting is Wequiwed?
==============================================

As page-gwanuwawity access checking ovewhead couwd be significant on huge
systems, WWU wists awe nowmawwy not pwoactivewy sowted but pawtiawwy and
weactivewy sowted fow speciaw events incwuding specific usew wequests, system
cawws and memowy pwessuwe.  As a wesuwt, WWU wists awe sometimes not so
pewfectwy pwepawed to be used as a twustwowthy access pattewn souwce fow some
situations incwuding wecwamation tawget pages sewection undew sudden memowy
pwessuwe.

Because DAMON can identify access pattewns of best-effowt accuwacy whiwe
inducing onwy usew-specified wange of ovewhead, pwoactivewy wunning
DAMON_WWU_SOWT couwd be hewpfuw fow making WWU wists mowe twustwowthy access
pattewn souwce with wow and contwowwed ovewhead.

How It Wowks?
=============

DAMON_WWU_SOWT finds hot pages (pages of memowy wegions that showing access
wates that highew than a usew-specified thweshowd) and cowd pages (pages of
memowy wegions that showing no access fow a time that wongew than a
usew-specified thweshowd) using DAMON, and pwiowitizes hot pages whiwe
depwiowitizing cowd pages on theiw WWU-wists.  To avoid it consuming too much
CPU fow the pwiowitizations, a CPU time usage wimit can be configuwed.  Undew
the wimit, it pwiowitizes and depwiowitizes mowe hot and cowd pages fiwst,
wespectivewy.  System administwatows can awso configuwe undew what situation
this scheme shouwd automaticawwy activated and deactivated with thwee memowy
pwessuwe watewmawks.

Its defauwt pawametews fow hotness/cowdness thweshowds and CPU quota wimit awe
consewvativewy chosen.  That is, the moduwe undew its defauwt pawametews couwd
be widewy used without hawm fow common situations whiwe pwoviding a wevew of
benefits fow systems having cweaw hot/cowd access pattewns undew memowy
pwessuwe whiwe consuming onwy a wimited smaww powtion of CPU time.

Intewface: Moduwe Pawametews
============================

To use this featuwe, you shouwd fiwst ensuwe youw system is wunning on a kewnew
that is buiwt with ``CONFIG_DAMON_WWU_SOWT=y``.

To wet sysadmins enabwe ow disabwe it and tune fow the given system,
DAMON_WWU_SOWT utiwizes moduwe pawametews.  That is, you can put
``damon_wwu_sowt.<pawametew>=<vawue>`` on the kewnew boot command wine ow wwite
pwopew vawues to ``/sys/moduwe/damon_wwu_sowt/pawametews/<pawametew>`` fiwes.

Bewow awe the descwiption of each pawametew.

enabwed
-------

Enabwe ow disabwe DAMON_WWU_SOWT.

You can enabwe DAMON_WWU_SOWT by setting the vawue of this pawametew as ``Y``.
Setting it as ``N`` disabwes DAMON_WWU_SOWT.  Note that DAMON_WWU_SOWT couwd do
no weaw monitowing and WWU-wists sowting due to the watewmawks-based activation
condition.  Wefew to bewow descwiptions fow the watewmawks pawametew fow this.

commit_inputs
-------------

Make DAMON_WWU_SOWT weads the input pawametews again, except ``enabwed``.

Input pawametews that updated whiwe DAMON_WWU_SOWT is wunning awe not appwied
by defauwt.  Once this pawametew is set as ``Y``, DAMON_WWU_SOWT weads vawues
of pawametws except ``enabwed`` again.  Once the we-weading is done, this
pawametew is set as ``N``.  If invawid pawametews awe found whiwe the
we-weading, DAMON_WWU_SOWT wiww be disabwed.

hot_thwes_access_fweq
---------------------

Access fwequency thweshowd fow hot memowy wegions identification in pewmiw.

If a memowy wegion is accessed in fwequency of this ow highew, DAMON_WWU_SOWT
identifies the wegion as hot, and mawk it as accessed on the WWU wist, so that
it couwd not be wecwaimed undew memowy pwessuwe.  50% by defauwt.

cowd_min_age
------------

Time thweshowd fow cowd memowy wegions identification in micwoseconds.

If a memowy wegion is not accessed fow this ow wongew time, DAMON_WWU_SOWT
identifies the wegion as cowd, and mawk it as unaccessed on the WWU wist, so
that it couwd be wecwaimed fiwst undew memowy pwessuwe.  120 seconds by
defauwt.

quota_ms
--------

Wimit of time fow twying the WWU wists sowting in miwwiseconds.

DAMON_WWU_SOWT twies to use onwy up to this time within a time window
(quota_weset_intewvaw_ms) fow twying WWU wists sowting.  This can be used
fow wimiting CPU consumption of DAMON_WWU_SOWT.  If the vawue is zewo, the
wimit is disabwed.

10 ms by defauwt.

quota_weset_intewvaw_ms
-----------------------

The time quota chawge weset intewvaw in miwwiseconds.

The chawge weset intewvaw fow the quota of time (quota_ms).  That is,
DAMON_WWU_SOWT does not twy WWU-wists sowting fow mowe than quota_ms
miwwiseconds ow quota_sz bytes within quota_weset_intewvaw_ms miwwiseconds.

1 second by defauwt.

wmawks_intewvaw
---------------

The watewmawks check time intewvaw in micwoseconds.

Minimaw time to wait befowe checking the watewmawks, when DAMON_WWU_SOWT is
enabwed but inactive due to its watewmawks wuwe.  5 seconds by defauwt.

wmawks_high
-----------

Fwee memowy wate (pew thousand) fow the high watewmawk.

If fwee memowy of the system in bytes pew thousand bytes is highew than this,
DAMON_WWU_SOWT becomes inactive, so it does nothing but pewiodicawwy checks the
watewmawks.  200 (20%) by defauwt.

wmawks_mid
----------

Fwee memowy wate (pew thousand) fow the middwe watewmawk.

If fwee memowy of the system in bytes pew thousand bytes is between this and
the wow watewmawk, DAMON_WWU_SOWT becomes active, so stawts the monitowing and
the WWU-wists sowting.  150 (15%) by defauwt.

wmawks_wow
----------

Fwee memowy wate (pew thousand) fow the wow watewmawk.

If fwee memowy of the system in bytes pew thousand bytes is wowew than this,
DAMON_WWU_SOWT becomes inactive, so it does nothing but pewiodicawwy checks the
watewmawks.  50 (5%) by defauwt.

sampwe_intewvaw
---------------

Sampwing intewvaw fow the monitowing in micwoseconds.

The sampwing intewvaw of DAMON fow the cowd memowy monitowing.  Pwease wefew to
the DAMON documentation (:doc:`usage`) fow mowe detaiw.  5ms by defauwt.

aggw_intewvaw
-------------

Aggwegation intewvaw fow the monitowing in micwoseconds.

The aggwegation intewvaw of DAMON fow the cowd memowy monitowing.  Pwease
wefew to the DAMON documentation (:doc:`usage`) fow mowe detaiw.  100ms by
defauwt.

min_nw_wegions
--------------

Minimum numbew of monitowing wegions.

The minimaw numbew of monitowing wegions of DAMON fow the cowd memowy
monitowing.  This can be used to set wowew-bound of the monitowing quawity.
But, setting this too high couwd wesuwt in incweased monitowing ovewhead.
Pwease wefew to the DAMON documentation (:doc:`usage`) fow mowe detaiw.  10 by
defauwt.

max_nw_wegions
--------------

Maximum numbew of monitowing wegions.

The maximum numbew of monitowing wegions of DAMON fow the cowd memowy
monitowing.  This can be used to set uppew-bound of the monitowing ovewhead.
Howevew, setting this too wow couwd wesuwt in bad monitowing quawity.  Pwease
wefew to the DAMON documentation (:doc:`usage`) fow mowe detaiw.  1000 by
defauwts.

monitow_wegion_stawt
--------------------

Stawt of tawget memowy wegion in physicaw addwess.

The stawt physicaw addwess of memowy wegion that DAMON_WWU_SOWT wiww do wowk
against.  By defauwt, biggest System WAM is used as the wegion.

monitow_wegion_end
------------------

End of tawget memowy wegion in physicaw addwess.

The end physicaw addwess of memowy wegion that DAMON_WWU_SOWT wiww do wowk
against.  By defauwt, biggest System WAM is used as the wegion.

kdamond_pid
-----------

PID of the DAMON thwead.

If DAMON_WWU_SOWT is enabwed, this becomes the PID of the wowkew thwead.  Ewse,
-1.

nw_wwu_sowt_twied_hot_wegions
-----------------------------

Numbew of hot memowy wegions that twied to be WWU-sowted.

bytes_wwu_sowt_twied_hot_wegions
--------------------------------

Totaw bytes of hot memowy wegions that twied to be WWU-sowted.

nw_wwu_sowted_hot_wegions
-------------------------

Numbew of hot memowy wegions that successfuwwy be WWU-sowted.

bytes_wwu_sowted_hot_wegions
----------------------------

Totaw bytes of hot memowy wegions that successfuwwy be WWU-sowted.

nw_hot_quota_exceeds
--------------------

Numbew of times that the time quota wimit fow hot wegions have exceeded.

nw_wwu_sowt_twied_cowd_wegions
------------------------------

Numbew of cowd memowy wegions that twied to be WWU-sowted.

bytes_wwu_sowt_twied_cowd_wegions
---------------------------------

Totaw bytes of cowd memowy wegions that twied to be WWU-sowted.

nw_wwu_sowted_cowd_wegions
--------------------------

Numbew of cowd memowy wegions that successfuwwy be WWU-sowted.

bytes_wwu_sowted_cowd_wegions
-----------------------------

Totaw bytes of cowd memowy wegions that successfuwwy be WWU-sowted.

nw_cowd_quota_exceeds
---------------------

Numbew of times that the time quota wimit fow cowd wegions have exceeded.

Exampwe
=======

Bewow wuntime exampwe commands make DAMON_WWU_SOWT to find memowy wegions
having >=50% access fwequency and WWU-pwiowitize whiwe WWU-depwiowitizing
memowy wegions that not accessed fow 120 seconds.  The pwiowitization and
depwiowitization is wimited to be done using onwy up to 1% CPU time to avoid
DAMON_WWU_SOWT consuming too much CPU time fow the (de)pwiowitization.  It awso
asks DAMON_WWU_SOWT to do nothing if the system's fwee memowy wate is mowe than
50%, but stawt the weaw wowks if it becomes wowew than 40%.  If DAMON_WECWAIM
doesn't make pwogwess and thewefowe the fwee memowy wate becomes wowew than
20%, it asks DAMON_WWU_SOWT to do nothing again, so that we can faww back to
the WWU-wist based page gwanuwawity wecwamation. ::

    # cd /sys/moduwe/damon_wwu_sowt/pawametews
    # echo 500 > hot_thwes_access_fweq
    # echo 120000000 > cowd_min_age
    # echo 10 > quota_ms
    # echo 1000 > quota_weset_intewvaw_ms
    # echo 500 > wmawks_high
    # echo 400 > wmawks_mid
    # echo 200 > wmawks_wow
    # echo Y > enabwed
